VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
History of U.S. Marine Corps
Operations in World War II
VOLUME V
HISTORICAL BRANCH, G-3 DIVISION, HEADQUARTERS, U.S. MARINE CORPS
PCN 19000262800
Victory and
Occupation
HISTORY OF U. S . MARINE CORPS
OPERATIONS IN WORLD WAR II
VOLUME V
by
BENIS M. FRANK
HENRY I. SHAW, JR.
Historical Branch, G-3 Division, Headquarters, U. S. Marine Corps
1968
Other Volumes in this Serie s
I
LtCol Frank 0 . Hough, Maj Verle E . Ludwig, and Henry I. Shaw, Jr.
Pearl Harbor to Guadalcana l
II
Henry I. Shaw, Jr. and Maj Douglas T. Kane
Isolation of Rabaul
III
Henry I. Shaw, Jr., Bernard C. Nalty, and Edwin T. Turnbladh
Central Pacific Driv e
Library of Congress Catalog Card No . 58—6000 2
PCN 1900026280 0
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S . Government Printing Office
Washington, D .C. 20402 - Price $11 .75
Foreword
This book represents the final work in the five-volume history of Marin e
Corps operations in World War II. The story of the Okinawa campaign ,
told earlier in a separate monograph, has been reevaluated and rewritte n
to detail events in proper proportion to each other and in a correct perspective to the war as a whole. New material, particularly from Japanes e
sources and from the recorded interviews conducted with senior Marin e
Corps officers who participated in the Marine Corps Oral History Program ,
has been included to provide fresh insight into the Marine Corps' contribution to the final victory of the Pacific War .
These pages cover Marine Corps activities in the Okinawa invasion
and the occupations of Japan and North China as well as the little-known
story of Marine prisoners of war. The book relates the Corps' postwa r
demobilization and reorganization programs as well. By 1945, amphibiou s
warfare doctrine and techniques had become highly developed . While new
and improved weapons were employed in the Okinawa campaign, th e
landing operation itself realistically demonstrated the soundness of fundamental amphibious doctrine developed over the years by the Navy and th e
Marine Corps. Again, as at Guadalcanal, the battle for Okinawa clearl y
reemphasized the fact that basic Marine Corps tactics and techniques wer e
sound. An outgrowth of the lessons learned at Okinawa was the establishment of a balanced air-ground amphibious force in readiness which ha s
become the hallmark of the present-day Marine Corps. Many of the
senior officers and commanders at Okinawa were prewar teachers and plan -
ners who had participated in the early operations of the war in the Pacific .
The successful application at Okinawa of the knowledge, expertise, an d
experiences of these individuals against a fanatic foe fighting a last-ditch
battle to protect his homeland was a vital factor in the final victory ove r
Japan.
The assault and capture of Okinawa represents the most ambitiou s
joint Army-Navy-Marine Corps operation in the history of the Pacifi c
War. Statistically, in comparison to previous assaults in this war zone, the
numbers of men, ships, and planes as well as the tons of munitions an d
supplies employed in this campaign stagger the imagination . But, had the
enemy not capitulated in face of the American victories in the western
Pacific and as a result of the atom bomb attacks on Hiroshima and Naga-
IV FOREWORD
saki, the personnel and logistics figures reflecting the requirements for th e
planned assault on Japan would have been even more overwhelming .
Fortunately for both sides, the war ended before more blood was shed .
After participating in several Central Pacific landings, I returned t o
the United States and was assigned to Headquarters Marine Corps . From
this vantage point, I observed the conduct of Marine Corps operations i n
the late stages of the war, when ground, sea, and air forces drove relentlessly towards the heart of the Japanese Empire. I also viewed with grea t
pride the outstanding performance of duty of Marine occupation troops in
Japan and North China . Here, small units and individual Marines prove d
themselves and the validity of Marine Corps training and discipline unde r
conditions that were often trying. The fund of command experience
acquired by junior officers and noncommissioned officers in a variety of
circumstances has since been drawn on constantly in peace and war.
Similarly, the discipline and training of Marines captured at th e
outbreak of the war and after was tried and found not wanting in face of
trials that beggar the imagination. In their own way, against the everpresent threat of death, these men continued fighting the enemy by variou s
means, including sabotage and escape . The heroism of such Marines
equalled and at times surpassed the records of the men who were engaged
in the march across the Pacific . The record of our Marine POWs in World
War II is something we can all be proud of.
Like other active duty Marines at the end of the war, I, too, experience d
the period of transition when the Corps reverted to a peacetime role in the
defense of this nation. Responsive to its combat experiences in Worl d
War II, the Marine Corps made many tactical and organizational changes,
as this book shows. Unchanged, however, was our highly prized esprit d e
corps, which, even as this is written, is being as jealously guarded as whe n
our Corps was first formed .
When the roll of America's battle honors is read, the names of the
World War II campaigns in which Marines fought—Wake Island to Okinawa—will strike a familiar ring to all who cherish liberty and freedom.
I am proud of my association with the men who won these honors and t o
have shared their hardships and their victories.
U ;to.rc e.) J . /aJ /tiA Cnn ~. . N
WALLACE M. GREENE, JR.
GENERAL, U.S. MARINE CORP S
COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS
Reviewed and approved
29 November 1967
Preface
After the amphibious assault of Guadalcanal, which marked the opening of the American offensive in the Pacific, the steadily accelerating temp o
of successful operations against the enemy inexorably led to an Allie d
victory in the war. Highlighting American operations was the NavyMarine Corps team's extensive reliance on the employment of amphibiou s
warfare techniques developed in the years before the war and improve d
upon under combat conditions.
The Okinawa landing has been accurately depicted as representin g
the culmination of amphibious development in the Pacific War and as th e
most audacious and complex military effort undertaken by amphibiou s
forces of the Pacific Fleet. This operation also marked the last majo r
ground action of the war against Japan, and the touchstone to the decisive
Allied victory here was the massive interservice effort which, as much as
anything else, hastened enemy capitulation.
Victory at Okinawa and the subsequent end of the war did not signa l
any letdown in the number and types of missions facing the Marine Corps ,
for at the same time that the postwar demobilization program drasticall y
reduced their strength, Fleet Marine Force units were assigned to occupation duty in Japan and North China and to re-establishing the Pacifi c
garrisons. This book treats these and such other hitherto-unpublished matters as the tragic story of those Marines who became prisoners of war .
Appearing here also for the first time is a full treatment of the development
and organization of the Marine infantry division and the many changes it
experienced during the course of the war . In addition, this book presents
an overview of the salient facts concerning Marine Corps campaigns in the
Pacific War first discussed in the previously published volumes of thi s
series.
Our purpose in publishing this operational history in durable form i s
to make the Marine Corps record permanently available for study by military personnel and the general public as well as by serious students o f
military history . We have made a conscious effort to be objective in our
treatment of the actions of Marines and of the men of other services who
fought at their side . We have tried to write with understanding about ou r
former enemies and in this effort have received invaluable help from th e
Japanese themselves. Few people so militant and unyielding in war have, in
VI PREFACE
peace, been as dispassionate and analytical about their actions . We owe a
special debt of gratitude to Mr. Susumu Nishiura, Chief of the War History
Office, Defense Agency of Japan, and to the many researchers and historians
of his office that reviewed our draft manuscripts .
This five-volume series was planned and outlined by Mr . Henry I.
Shaw, Jr., Chief Historian, while Mr. Benis M. Frank was responsible for
Volume V itself. Mr. Shaw wrote the story of Marines in North China and
his earlier research and writing provided the basis for that part of the
book concerning Marines in the occupation of Japan . Mr. Frank wrote
the rest of this book, revising and editing it for publication. In his research
on the Okinawa operation, Mr. Frank frequently consulted the materia l
assembled for the monograph Okinawa : Victory in the Pacific by Major
Charles S . Nichols, Jr., and Mr. Shaw. Mr. Frank also prepared all the
appendices. Successive Heads of the Historical Branch—Major John H .
Johnstone, Colonel Thomas G . Roe, Colonel Joseph F. Wagner, Jr., Lieutenant Colonel Richard J. Schening, and Colonel Frank C. Caldwell—made
the final critical review of portions of the manuscript. The book was completed under the direction of Colonel Caldwell, current Head of the Branch .
A number of leading participants in the actions described have commented on the preliminary drafts of pertinent portions of the book . Their
valuable assistance is gratefully acknowledged. Several senior officers, i n
particular General Alexander A . Vandegrift, General Lemuel C. Shepherd,
Jr., General Gerald C. Thomas, Lieutenant General Keller E. Rockey, Lieutenant General Louis E. Woods, Lieutenant General Pedro A . del Valle,
Lieutenant General Francis P. Mulcahy, Major General DeWitt Peck, Major
General William A. Worton, Major General Ford 0. Rogers, Major General
Wilburt S . Brown, and Rear Admiral Charles J. Moore made valuabl e
additions to their written comments during personal interviews . A number
of these interviews were conducted by Mr. Frank in his capacity as Head of
the Oral History Unit, Historical Branch, which administers the Marin e
Corps Oral History Program .
Special thanks are due to the historical agencies of the other service s
for their critical readings of draft chapters of this book. Outstanding
among the many official historians who measurably assisted the authors
were : the late Dr. John Miller, Jr., Deputy Chief Historian, and Dr.
Stetson Conn, Chief Historian, Office of the Chief of Military History ,
Department of the Army ; Dr. Dean C. Allard, Head, Operational Archive s
Branch, Naval History Division, Department of the Navy ; and Dr. Robert
F. Futrell, Historian, Historical Studies Branch, U. S. Air Force Historical
Division, Aerospace Studies Institute, Maxwell Air Force Base .
Chief Warrant Officer Jo E . Kennedy, and his predecessors as Historical Branch Administrative Officer, Second Lieutentant Gerald S . Duncan
and First Lieutenants John J. Hainsworth and D'Arcy E . Grisier, ably
PREFACE VII
handled the many exacting duties involved in processing the volume from
first drafts through final printed form. A number of the early preliminary
typescripts were prepared by Mrs. Miriam R. Smallwood, Mrs. Joyce E.
Bonnett, and Miss Alexandria Jozwick, while the remainder were done b y
Miss Kay P . Sue, who expertly handled the painstaking task of typing th e
final manuscript for the printer. Miss Sue also did much of the meticulou s
work demanded in preparing the index .
The maps were drafted by Sergeant Thomas L. Russell. Unless otherwise noted, official Department of Defense photographs have been use d
throughout the text.
H. NICKERSON, JR .
MAJOR GENERAL, U.S. MARINE CORP S
ASSISTANT CHIEF OF STAFF, G-3

Contents
PART I PROLOGUE TO THE EN D
CHAPTER PAGE
1. Strategic Background 3
2. The Japanese Situation 1 4
3. Marine Corps Order of Battle 23
PART II OKINAWA
1. The Target and the Enemy 3 1
2. Project ICEBERG 5 7
3. Assault Preparations 8 3
4. The First Days Ashore 109
5. Phase I Continued 157
6. The Defense Stiffens 188
7. Forging Ahead 214
8. Reduction of the Shuri Bastion 244
9. Breakout to the South 288
10. Battle's End 325
11. ICEBERG Dissolves 367
PART III THE END OF THE WA R
1. Future Operations 397
2. The Closing Days 41 0
3. Return to the Islands 449
PART IV OCCUPATION OF JAPA N
1. Initial Planning and Operations 475
2. Kyushu Deployment to December 1945 497
3. Last Months in Japan 510
X CONTENTS
PART V NORTH CHINA MARINES
CHAPTER PAGE
1. Background for Military Assistance 521
2. Ashore in North China 537
3. An Extended Stay 57 1
4. Abortive Peace Mission 594
5. Withdrawal of the 1st Marine Division 615
6. Withdrawal 635
PART VI CONCLUSION
1. Amphibious Doctrine in World War II 653
2. A Final Accounting 677
APPENDICES
A. Marine POWs 731
B. Bibliographical Notes 790
C. Guide to Abbreviations 804
D. Military Map Symbols 810
E. Chronology 811
F. Fleet Marine Force Status—30 April 1945 819
G. Fleet Marine Force Status—31 October 1946 . . 835
H. Table of Organization G–100—Marine Division . 840
I. Comparison of Organization—Marine Division . 843
J. Comparison of Equipment—Marine Division . . 847
K. World War II Development of the Marine Infantry Regiment 849
L. Marine Task Organization and Command List 852
M. Marine Casualties 884
N. Unit Citations 885
Index 893
ILLUSTRATIONS
Admiral Nimitz Briefs the President at Pearl Harbor 1 0
Combined Chiefs of Staff Meet at Quebec 1 0
Thirty-second Army Officers Sit For a Portrait 42
North Bank of the Bishi Gawa 42
CONTENTS xI
ILLUSTRATIONS—Continued PAG E
Landing Craft Form Up For the Run to Kerama Retto Beaches 10 1
155mm Guns of the 420th Field Artillery Group on Keise Shima 10 1
Main Batteries of USS Tennessee Hurl Tons of Explosives . 110
Aerial View of the Hagushi Anchorage 110
Bewildered Civilians 124
Two Marines Safeguard a Young Okinawan 124
Heavy Undergrowth on the Ishikawa Isthmus 133
Grinning Troops of the 29th Marines Heading For Chuta 133
Japanese 105mm Gun Captured on Yae Take 137
Suicide Boats Found at Unten Ko 137
USS Enterprise Is Hit By a Kamikaze 156
Tracers Fill the Sky 156
Yellow Beach 3 On L Plus 2 161
Causeways Relieve Logistical Problems 16 1
Marine Reconnaissance Personnel Prepare Rubber Boats 165
Dominating Ie Shima is Iegusugu Yama 165
Marine Rocket Launchers in Support of the Drive South 170
Awacha Pocket 170
Sugar Loaf Hill 246
Tanks Evacuate the Wounded 246
Wana Ridge 258
105mm Howitzer of the 15th Marines 258
Aerial View of Shuri on 28 April 279
Shuri, One Month Later 279
Corkscrew 285
Blowtorch 285
Air Delivery Section Marines 294
VMTB—232 TBM Drops Supplies 294
6th Division Marines Land on Oroku Peninsula 317
Final Sweep of Oroku Peninsula 317
Marine Casualties Are Evacuated by Spotter Plane 336
8th Marines Landing on Iheya Shima 336
Marine Tanks Shelling Positions in the South 355
Cooperative Prisoners 35 5
Men of the Tenth Army Pay Homage 366
Surrender of All Japanese Forces in the Ryukyus 366
VMF(CVS)—511 Corsair Ready to be Launched . . 420
An Explosion Rips the Critically Damaged Franklin . . . 420
Among the Few Marines Present At the Surrender Ceremony 440
Corsairs and Hellcats Fly in Formation Over Tokyo Bay 440
To The Colors 458
XII CONTENTS
ILLUSTRATIONS—Continued PAGE
Fleet Landing Force Personnel Are Transferred 480
Members of the Yokosuka Occupation Force 486
General Clement Looks Over Yokosuka Naval Base 486
The "New" 4th Marines Passes in Review 491
26th Marines Moves Into Sasebo 491
Battered Buddhist Figures 504
More Than 200 Japanese Planes Are Destroyed 504
1st Marine Division Troops Landing at Taku 554
Tientsin Citizens Welcome First Marines To Return 554
Navy Carrier Planes in a "Show of Force" 562
Repatriated Japanese Soldiers Salute American Flag 562
Arrow Directs Corsairs to Village 587
Communist Mine Damages Roadbed 587
Chinese Nationalist Sentries 646
A Portion of the Marines Remaining in Tsingtao 646
North China Marines 735
POW Quarters at Fengt'ai 735
Shadow of a B–29 on a Supply Drop 784
American and British POWs 784
MAPS
1. Nansei Shoto 33
2. Okinawa Shima 35
3. Japanese Defensive Positions 52
4. ICEBERG Scheme of Maneuver 59
5. Seizure of Kerama Retto 105
6. Landing Plan 113
7. Severing the Island 119
8. 6th Marine Division Progress, Motobu Peninsula, 14 April 1945 143
9. 6th Marine Division Progress, Motobu Peninsula, 15–16 Apri l
1945 147
10. 6th Marine Division Progress, Motobu Peninsula, 17–23 April
1945 153
11. Reconnaissance and Capture of the Eastern Islands 163
12. Assault and Capture of Ie Shima 168
13. 1st Marine Division Advances 200
14. Dakeshi–Wana 21 5
15. Capture of Naha 255
16. Thirty-second Army Dispositions 291
CONTENTS XIII
MAPS—Continued PAGE
17. Battle for Oroku Peninsula, 4—6 June 1945 . . 30 1
18. Battle for Oroku Peninsula, 7—9 June 1945 . . 312
19. Battle for Oroku Peninsula, 10—11 June 1945 . 319
20. Battle for Oroku Peninsula, 12—14 June 1945 322
21 . Seizure of Kunishi Ridge 334
22 . Outlying Islands 349
23. End of Organized Resistance 359
24. Scheme of Maneuver, Operation OLYMPIC 405
25 . Marine Surrender and Occupation Duties 451
26. Operations BLACKLIST, CAMPUS—BELEAGUER 477
27 . Yokosuka Occupation 482
28 . Maximum Deployment of VAC 494
29 . VAC Deployment, 8 December 1945 513
30. 2d Marine Division Deployment 515
31 . Typical Deployment of a Marine Regiment 517
32 . China, 1945 523
33. North China 538
34. Hopeh Deployment 549
35. Anping Ambush 611
36. Attack on Hsin Ho 626
I. 14th IIB Defensive Dispositions Map Section
II. 6th Marine Division Progress in Northern Okinawa Map Section
III. XXIV Corps Progress, 5—30 April 1945 . . . . Map Section
IV. Japanese Counteroffensive and Tenth Army Progress, 5—21 May 1945 Map Section
V. Battle for Sugar Loaf Hill, 13—15 May 1946 Map Section
VI. Battle for Sugar Loaf Hill, 16—17 May 1945 Map Section
VII. Battle for Sugar Loaf Hill, 18—19 May 1945 Map Section
VIII. Tenth Army Progress, 21—31 May 1945 . . . Map Section
IX. Breakout to the South, 1—12 June 1945 . . Map Section
X. Tenth Army Progress, 14—21 June 1945 . . . . Map Section
XI. Significant Marine Corps Activities in World War II Map Sectio n
PART I
Prologue to the End

CHAPTER 1
Strategic Background
In a report submitted to Secretary of
the Navy James V. Forrestal on 12
March 1945, the Commander in Chief,
United States Fleet (CominCh) , Fleet
Admiral Ernest J. King, stated that :
The amphibious operations of the spring ,
summer and autumn of 1944 carried ou r
forces such great distances across th e
Pacific that in February 1945 they wer e
enabled to begin the assault upon th e
inner defenses of the Japanese Empir e
itself. '
Recognizing all that had been accomplished to the date of his report, Admira l
King at the same time cautioned against
complacency and warned of "a long ,
tough and laborious road ahead." 2
Among the many factors leading to
the favorable Allied posture in the Pacific at the beginning of 1945 was the
strategic concept for the prosecution of
the Pacific War adopted at the Cairo
Conference (SEXTANT) in December
1943. In essence, President Roosevel t
and Prime Minister Churchill agree d
upon a grand plan that dictated the
thrust of two concurrent and mutuall y
supporting series of operations across
the Pacific towards the heart of the
Japanese Empire. These drives along
'The War Reports of General of the Army
George C. Marshall, General, of the Army H . H.
Arnold, and Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King
(Philadelphia : J. B. Lippincott Company,
1947), p. 613, hereafter War Reports.
Ibid., p . 649.
310-224 0 - 69 - 2
separate approach axes would establis h
bases from which a massive effort could
be launched against the Formosa-Luzon -
China coastal areas in the spring of
1945.
One drive, to be mounted by Allied forces under General Douglas
MacArthur, Commander in Chief,
Southwest Pacific Area (CinCSWPA), 3
was to move along the northern coast of
On 3 March 1942, the Combined Chiefs o f
Staff approved for the Western Pacific a dividing line that separated assigned spheres o f
command in that area . Burma and all South -
east Asia west of a north-south line betwee n
Java and Sumatra were added to General Si r
Archibald V. Wavell's India Command responsibility, and the British Chiefs of Staff
were charged with the strategic direction of
this theater. The whole Pacific east of the ne w
line was assigned to American Joint Chiefs o f
Staff control. The JCS then divided the Pacific into two strategic regions ; the one in
which the Navy would have paramount interests was the Pacific Ocean Areas, and the other
in which the Army would be dominant was th e
Southwest Pacific Area . On 18 March 1942,
MacArthur was designated CinCSWPA ; on 3
April, Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Commander
in Chief, Pacific Fleet, was confirmed as th e
commander of the Pacific Ocean Areas. See
LtCol Frank 0 . Hough, Maj Verle E . Ludwig,
and Henry I. Shaw, Jr., Pearl Harbor t o
Guadalcanal—History of U . S. Marine Corps
Operations in World War II, v. 1 (Washington :
HistBr, G–3 Div, HQMC, 1958) pp . 86-87, hereafter Hough, Ludwig, and Shaw, Pearl Harbo r
to Guadalcanal, and Map I, Map Section of tha t
volume, for additional information concerning
these two American commands.
3
4 VICTORY AND OCCUPATIO N
New Guinea and thence to the Philippines ; in the second, forces of Admira l
Chester W. Nimitz, Commander in
Chief, Pacific Ocean Area (CinCPOA) ,
would push through the Central Pacifi c
to the core of Japanese island defense s
guarding the heart of the Empire. During this two-pronged advance, the major
components of the Pacific Fleet, under
Nimitz as Commander in Chief, Pacifi c
Fleet (CinCPac), would support, as as -
signed, specific amphibious operations
within both strategic command areas,
and at the same time contain the Japanese fleet.
Almost immediately after the two
heads of state had approved at SEXTANT the revised plan for the defeat of
Japan, the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) ,
forwarded the directive to MacArthu r
and Nimitz, whose §taffs and command s
took steps to implement it. January
1944 opened with a landing at Saidor in
New Guinea. At the end of the month,
Central Pacific forces landed in the
Marshalls and spent February thrusting
deeply into the island group to collapse
those outposts of the imperial defenses . 4
By the end of March, the Bismarck
Archipelago barrier had been permanently breached and airfields and
harbors seized in the Admiralties.
MacArthur's forces began the drive u p
the New Guinea coast in April, with
landings at Aitape and Hollandia. With
' For the story of the Marshalls landing an d
the Central Pacific drive, see Henry I . Shaw,
Jr., Bernard C. Nalty, and Edwin T. Turnbladh,
The Central Pacific Drive—History of U. S.
Marine Corps Operations in World War II, v.
III (Washington : HistBr, G–3 Div, HQMC,
1966), hereafter Shaw, Nalty, and Turnbladh ,
The Central Pacific Drive.
the naval attack on and immobilization of
Truk, the capture of Guam, Saipan, and
Tinian in the Marianas during the summer of 1944, and the defeat of the Japanese fleet in the First Battle of the
Philippine Sea, the Central Pacific driv e
cut the inner ring of Japanese island
defenses in several places and consolidated footholds from which the drive
westward was to continue . After the
amphibious assaults on Peleliu an d
Angaur and the unopposed capture of
Ulithi for use as a fleet anchorage and
an advance base, Admiral Nimitz' force s
stood poised on the threshold of the
Japanese defenses ringing the Home
Islands. 5
By the end of July, Admiral William
F. Halsey's South Pacific troops ha d
advanced up the Solomons, and
MacArthur's forces along hundreds of
miles of the northern coast of New
Guinea, in a series of leapfrogging operations. Thousands of Japanese soldiers
on Bougainville, New Britain, Ne w
Ireland, and New Guinea itself were
neutralized and isolated, and beyon d
hope of being effectively employe d
elsewhere . In September, MacArthur's
forces occupied Morotai, southeast of
the Philippines, before the planne d
landing on Mindanao .
In the course of naval covering strike s
prior to the landings on Morotai and i n
the Western Carolines, Admiral Halsey's
For the Peleliu operation and the story of
Marine aviation in the Central Pacific, see
George W. Garand and Truman R. Strobridge ,
"Operations in the Western Pacific—History of
U. S. Marine Corps Operations in World
War II," v . IV, to be published in 1969, here -
after Garand and Strobridge, "Western Pacifi c
Operations."
STRATEGIC BACKGROUND 5
fast carrier forces had discovered surprisingly weak enemy resistance in the
central Philippines. In a follow-up to
this discovery, the line of advance
through the Southwest Pacific was reoriented northwards. Fully aware of
"the necessity of being alert for symptoms of enemy weakness and of bein g
ready to exploit them," Halsey recommended an early return of American
troops to the Philippines in the LeyteSamar area and cancellation of certain
operations scheduled elsewhere . 6 His
recommendation was approved by the
JCS.
In the overall planning for the defeat
of Japan, the strategists anticipated that
the final phase of the Pacific War woul d
involve a massive assault against the
industrial heartland of the Empire by
means of amphibious landings on the
southern coast of Honshu in the area
bounded by Shimonoseki in the sout h
and the Kanto Plain near Tokyo in the
north. Successful Allied operations in
1944 had brought ultimate victory int o
sight, and submarine blockade and ai r
bombardment both had the Japanese
viewing ultimate defeat, but some
American commanders doubted the wisdom of using the Formosa-Luzon-Chin a
area as a springboard from which to
launch the attack against Japan in 1945.
More importantly, they believed that
valuable time was being wasted and that
a decision had to be made . In view of the
SEXTANT Plan, and the advanced stat e
of the operations against Japan, JCS
FAdm William F. Halsey, USN, and LCdr
J. Bryan, III, USNR, Admiral Halsey's Story
(New York : Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill
Book Company, Inc., 1947), p. 199, hereafter
Halsey and Bryan, Halsey's Story.
planners were confronted with the problem of whether American forces should :
(1) move on to Luzon and the rest of the
Philippines, (2) invade only Luzon in the
Philippines and also strike at Formosa
and the China coast, or (3) attack the
Philippines, Formosa, and the China
coast. Arising out of the third optio n
was an additional thorny problem—
which area to attack first.
While Admiral King and some planners in Washington considered the possibility of entirely bypassing the Philippines, this concept was apparently only
a minor aspect of the major effort by
many officers to have Luzon, in particular, bypassed. The alternative to this
was the seizure of Formosa . On the othe r
hand, ample evidence exists to indicate
that those who sought the Formosa objective did not intend this to be an exclusive operation, for they believed that
the invasion of Luzon could procee d
simultaneously with the Formosa operation or take place at a later date. ?
Determined to return to the Philippines, MacArthur doubted the necessity
of the Marianas campaign but generally
approved the Palaus landings since they
would directly support his impending
operations. Admiral King took just the
opposite view ; he concluded that the
occupation of the Marianas was essential and that the necessity of recapturin g
all of the Philippine Islands was questionable. Furthermore, he was firmly
convinced that the main American effort
should be bent in mounting a drive
across the Central Pacific to Formosa
Dir, Naval Hist, ltr to Hd, HistBr, G–3
Div, HQMC, dtd 4Nov65, hereafter Dir, Naval
Hist ltr I.
6 VICTORY AND OCCUPATIO N
and then on to the China coast . $ Although various subordinate commanders
in the Pacific Ocean Area held conflicting views regarding what course should
be taken for the final phases of the war,
the SEXTANT decision made it imperative that their staffs spend most of 1944
in planning for Operation CAUSEWAY ,
the invasion of Formosa, projected fo r
the spring of 1945.
On the basis of a JCS directive issued
on 12 March 1944, 9 the prevailing conflict was partially allayed . Admiral Nimitz was directed to land on 15 June in
the Southern Marianas and on 15
September in the Palaus. General
MacArthur was instructed to seize Hollandia in April and make plans for a
landing on 15 November on Mindanao .
Contained in the JCS order was a statement of long-range objectives that required Nimitz as CinCPOA to prepare
the plans for an assault early in 194 5
on Formosa, and assigned CinCSWPA
the responsibility of planning for th e
recapture of Luzon "should such operations prove necessary prior to the mov e
on Formosa." t o
In view of the March JCS directive ,
which outlined the general concept o f
CAUSEWAY, Nimitz reconsidered and
revised the troop list for the operation
8 FAdm Ernest H. King and Cdr Walter M.
Whitehill, Fleet Admiral King : A Naval Record (New York : W. W. Norton & Co., Inc. ,
1952), p. 537, hereafter King and Whitehill ,
King's Naval Record.
'JCS 713/4, dtd 12Mar44, cited in Maj
Charles S. Nichols, Jr., and Henry I. Shaw, Jr. ,
Okinawa : Victory in the Pacific (Washington :
HistBr, G—3 Div, HQMC, 1955), p. 12, here -
after Nichols and Shaw, Okinawa Victory.
10 Ibid.
many times, and finally designated th e
task force commanders. Admiral
Raymond A . Spruance, Commander,
Fifth Fleet and Central Pacific Tas k
Forces was to be in overall charge . Vice
Admiral Richmond K. Turner was to
command the expeditionary forces, an d
Lieutenant General Simon B. Buckner,
Jr., USA, was to command the expeditionary troops and the Tenth Army. 1 1
Further discussion regarding what
the nature of Pacific strategy was to be
following the Marianas operation continued after the JCS had directed the
preparation of plans for CAUSEWAY.
This topic was the subject of one of th e
periodic conferences which Admirals
King and Nimitz and their key deputies
held throughout the war, either at Pearl
Harbor or San Francisco . At one such
meeting on 6 May 1944, Vice Admiral
Charles M. Cooke, Jr., King's chief of
staff, pointed out that, although the JC S
directive envisioned a landing on Formosa in February 1945, the best time
for this operation—in view of other considerations—would probably be November-December 1944 . 12 Cooke also noted
that once Japan had been cut off from
the mainland, her islands could b e
bombed and perhaps Kyushu even
invaded.
During 1944, the Joint War Plans
Committee (JWPC) had also considere d
11 CinCPOA msg of 10Aug44 to addees, cite d
in History of USAFMidPac and Predecessor
Commands During World War II, 7Dec41—
2Sep45, Hist of G—5 Sec, n .d ., p . 174, (OCMH) ,
hereafter USAFMidPac G—5 Hist.
12 Minutes, 2d meeting, CominCh—GinCPac
Pacific Conference, 6May44, p . 14 (OAB,
NHD), hereafter Minutes CominCh-CinCPac
Conference with date .
STRATEGIC BACKGROUND 7
what the nature of future Pacific strategy should be. In early June, it issued
a comprehensive study which far exceeded in scope and perspective the
previous strategic positions taken by
the Joint Chiefs and the Combine d
Chiefs of Staff (CCS), and outlined a
series of campaigns that would lead to
an assault on the Tokyo Plain by the en d
of 1945. 13 In this study, the JWPC
pointed out that in view of the present
and anticipated rate of advance of increasingly stronger American forces in
the Pacific, it would appear that the "Inner Zone Defense of Japan" would be
reached by spring 1945. The study concluded that the overall strategy approved at SEXTANT was inadequate,
i.e., future operations as planned extended only to the perimeter of the
Formosa-Luzon line.
Instead, the JWPC recommended a
new schedule or strategic concept for
ending the war in the Pacific . The committee suggested that three phases pre -
cede the invasion of Japan : (1) During
the period 1 April to 30 June 1945,
American forces would seize positions
in the Bonins and the Ryukyus from
which they would launch an invasio n
against the central China coast in th e
Hangchow Bay area ; (2) They woul d
spend the time from 30 June to 30 September in consolidating and initially exploiting the China beachhead ; and (3)
The forces would land in Southern
13 JPS 476, dtd 4Jun44, Subj : Operations
Against Japan, Subsequent to Formosa, cited
in Ray S. Cline, Washington Command Post :
The Operations Division—United States Army
in World War II (Washington : OCMH, DA,
1951), p. 337, hereafter Cline, Washingto n
Command Post .
Kyushu 1 October and on the Tokyo
Plain on Honshu on 31 December. This
planning paper was passed to the Joint
Staff Planners, who approved and forwarded it to the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
who likewise favored the revised concept. On 11 July, the CCS received the
study along with a JCS recommendation
that the SEXTANT timetable for operations in the Pacific be changed to reflect the suggested JWPC schedule.
At one of the meetings held during
the CominCh—CinCPac conference in the
period 13—22 July 1944, Admiral King
informed the conferees of the JCS action
regarding the JWPC study. He also indicated that he believed Luzon could not
be invaded before Formosa or Japan
without the Americans first investigating what Saipan and Guam could offer in
the way of fleet anchorages and bas e
facilities for the support of the Luzon
invasion forces. 14 Vice Admiral John H.
Tower, Commander, Air Forces, Pacific Fleet, stated that neither the areas
in American possession at that time o r
prospectively available would permit th e
establishment of naval and supply base s
which would be adequate for the support
of the future operations contemplate d
in the JWPC study. 1 5
Along these lines, it was suggeste d
that the feasibility and advisability of
"Minutes, CominCh-CinCPac Conference ,
13-22Ju144, p. 10. It should be noted that
Saipan, invaded on 15 June, was not secure d
until 9 July, when the general mop-up began.
The invasion of Guam, which had been delaye d
until 21 July, had caused a backup in the
supply pipeline and it was contemplated that
this situation could adversely affect subsequent
operations.
13 Ibid., p. 13.
8 VICTORY AND OCCUPATIO N
taking San Pedro Bay in Leyte Gulf as
a fleet anchorage be investigated . Although considerable discussion of this
recommendation resulted, no firm decision was made at this time .
Regarding the invasion of the Bonins,
Admiral Tower stated that, because the
United States plans for the establishment of VLR (very long range) bomber
bases in the Marianas were close to
being realized, steps to enhance their
effectiveness should be taken at the
earliest practicable date . This meant the
seizure and development of positions in
the Bonins, where fighter and bombe r
aircraft stationed on fields develope d
there could supplement and support th e
planned air raids on Japan. On the
other hand, Admiral Tower added that a
study of the prospective employment of
fleet and assault forces did not indicat e
the Bonins could be taken until 1945,
unless the timing of then currently
planned operations could be drasticall y
revised. Because these were of greate r
importance in the overall scheme for the
defeat of Japan, the occupations of Iwo
Jima and Chichi Jima would have to be
deferred.ls
Most of the others present at this
meeting generally agreed with Admira l
Tower's conclusions. Rear Admiral Forrest P. Sherman, Nimitz' chief of staff
and head of his War Plans Division,
pointed out that for the invasions o f
Leyte and Formosa—the two major operations of a decisive nature schedule d
following the completion of the landings
in the Palaus—American forces had
been tailored down considerably. Sherman emphasized that if more ships and
troops became available, they should b e
employed to supplement those already
assigned to the landings on Leyte an d
Formosa. In no case, should they be
diverted for such "minor operations"
as the occupation of Iwo Jima and
Chichi Jima."
Admiral King agreed with this line
of thinking, and added that it would b e
unwise to assault the Bonins until
American forces were ready to invade
Japan following the Formosa operation .
Nonetheless, at this time, he directe d
CinCPac to prepare plans for the invasion of the Bonins.
As for determining those objective s
that were to follow the capture of th e
Southern Marianas and the Pal us an d
were to be mounted before the vasion
of Japan, even President R osevelt's
visit to Pearl Harbor late in July to confer with MacArthur and Nimitz faile d
to resolve the impasse. When the conference began, Admiral Nimitz, the
first to speak, presented the Navy
position .
Contrary to general belief, no rea l
controversy arose between Nimitz and
MacArthur regarding the conduct of
future operations against Japan . Nimitz
made this quite clear in a letter to Admiral King, summarizing in a few
words the discussions at the Pearl
Harbor meetings. Nimitz told CominCh
that :
. . . our conferences with the Commande r
in Chief of the Army and Navy [President Roosevelt] and the Commande r
in Chief, Southwest Pacific Are a
[MacArthur] were quite satisfactory. The
general trend of the discussion, like our
own, was along the line of seein g
16 Ibid., p . 14.
17 Ibid.
STRATEGIC BACKGROUND 9
MacArthur into the central Philippines,
thereafter going direct to the Formos a
Strait, and leaving the SWPA forces to
work into Luzon under the cover of the
Formosa operation. It was made clear
that the time has not yet arrived for firm
decisions on moves subsequent to Leyte . 1 8
It is possible, however, that Nimitz
and some of his staff had some doubts o n
the feasibility of the Formosa operation
and the concept underlying the Formosa -
first policy. Partial evidence for this is
found in the fact that CinCPac staf
members had prepared plans to seize
Okinawa as a substitute for Formosa
"well before such an operation gaine d
serious consideration among high-leve l
planners in Washington ." 1 9
After listening to the views of both
MacArthur and Nimitz, the President
returned to Washington without rendering a decision on the courses of action to
be followed after the landings on Leyte .
Nor does it appear that a firm decision
for post-Leyte operations was expected .
Although Nimitz may have entertaine d
other opinions concerning future strat18 Adm Chester W. Nimitz ltr to Adm Ernest
J. King, dtd 31Ju144 (OAB, NHD) . This letter also indicates that King favored the establishment of positions in the southern or central
Philippines.
19 Robert R. Smith, Triumph in the Philippines—United States Army in World War II
—The War in the Pacific (Washington :
OCMH, DA, 1963), p . 9. For a thorough discussion of the Luzon-Formosa controversy, see
Ibid., chap 1, "The Debate Over Luzon," and
Samuel Eliot Morison, The Liberation of the
Philippines—Luzon, Mindanao, the Visayas :
1944–1945—History of United States Nava l
Operations in World War II, v . XIII (Boston:
Little, Brown and Company, 1959), chap 1 ,
"Planning for Luzon, October–December 1944 ."
egy, he was still operating under a JC S
directive relative to the Formosa operation. On 23 August 1944, the CinCPa c
joint staff study of CAUSEWAY wa s
published. In this document Admiral
Nimitz indicated that he intended to
invade Formosa after SWPA forces ha d
established positions in the south an d
central Philippines. Following the successful operations on Formosa, the
Ryukyus and the Bonins or the China
coast were to be invaded as a prelude to
the assault on Japan itself. A Luzon
operation, as such, was not mentioned in
this plan.
The dispute remained unresolved until
9 September, when, at the Quebec Conference (OCTAGON) , the Combine d
Chiefs of Staff formally adopted an d
incorporated the JWPC concept within
the SEXTANT schedule for the defeat
of Japan, and in effect revised it. For
planning purposes, the CCS then approved a new schedule of operations,
which ended the campaigns of 1945 with
a landing on Kyushu in October and on
the Tokyo Plain in December. 20
The Combined Chiefs also agreed that,
if the Formosa operation materialized,
it would be preceded by invasions of th e
Bonins in April, the Ryukyus in May,
and the China coast in the period Marc h
to June 1945. On 15 September 1944, th e
JCS further clarified impending Pacifi c
operations by cancelling the scheduled
invasions of Mindanao and Yap and
2 ° CCS 417/8, dtd 9Sep44, title : Opn for th e
Defeat of Japan ; CCS 417/9, OCTAGON, dtd
11Sep44, title : Over-All Objective in Wa r
Against Japan; Min 173d Meeting CCS,
13Sep44, all cited in Cline, Washington Command Post, p . 339.
10 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
ADMIRAL NIMITZ briefs General MacArthur, President Roosevelt, and Admiral
Leahy at the July 1944 Pearl Harbor conference . (USA SC207297)
COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF meet with President Roosevelt and Prime Minister
Churchill at the OCTAGON Conference in Quebec, September 1944 . (USA SC194469)
STRATEGIC BACKGROUND 1 1
setting 20 October as the date for the
invasion of Leyte . 2 '
On 11 September, Lieutenant General
Millard F. Harmon, Commanding General, Army Air Forces (AAF), Pacific
Ocean Areas, proposed the abandonmen t
of the Formosa operation in favor o f
amphibious landings in the Bonins and
the Ryukyus. Harmon recommended the
capture of Iwo Jima by 1 January 194 5
and Luzon by 1 June 1945 . Further, he
suggested that POA troops seize Okinawa and Amami 0 Shima after
MacArthur's forces recaptured Luzon ;
Kyushu was to be invaded in September
1945. Harmon also stated that he believed that the seizure and use of Luzo n
was an important consideration in the
overall strategy of the Pacific War an d
that the launching of a major operation
against Formosa would dilute some o f
the force being applied against th e
Japanese in other action areas. 22 In
21 The invasion of Mindanao was restored to
the plans for the recapture of the Philippines,
and MacArthur's X Corps landed on the
beaches of Illana Bay on 17 April 1945.
" General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff
of the Army, had favored the Formosa-first
plan, and like Admiral King "had expresse d
the opinion that Japan itself, rather than
Luzon, should be considered the substitute fo r
Formosa." Smith, op. cit., p . 9. In September,
General Marshall revised his opinion and believed, that, in view of existing facts, th e
choice for the next operation would have to be
Luzon. It seemed more logical to him to secur e
Luzon—which MacArthur promised to take i n
six weeks—than to concentrate on Formosa ,
which would take longer to capture . Marshall
reasoned that if all of the resources that wer e
to be poured into Formosa were diverted t o
Luzon, Admiral Nimitz could get ready to at -
tack the Bonins and Ryukyus all the sooner,
and the timetable for the invasion of Japa n
could be advanced.
order to husband resources and to accelerate the march toward Japan, Harmon believed that the capture of Luzo n
for its airfields was imperative . Air
operations launched from Luzon coul d
neutralize Formosa and effectively cut
Japanese communications to South
China and Malaya . 2 3
Less than a week later, after a
review of the plans contemplated fo r
the CAUSEWAY operation, Admiral
Nimitz set forth his thoughts in a lette r
circulated to his senior commanders . In
a key section of this letter, CinCPac
recommended to consider the possibility :
. . . of a re-orientation of a strategy in
the Pacific which will provide for an advance northward with eventual assaults on
the Empire itself, rather than intermediate
action along the China Coast, thus indicating the probability of occupation of
Iwo Jima and Okinawa with targe t
dates as early as practicable after
CAUSEWAY. 2 4
He also directed Admirals Spruance an d
Turner and General Buckner to recommend suitable physical targets in the
Formosa-Amoy-Pescadores areas for
Operation CAUSEWAY . Criteria for
the selections were the number of naval
and air bases that would have to be
established and the type and total of
major troop units required . On 26 September, General Buckner submitted
what he considered to be the primar y
objection to the entire projected operation ; he said that the shortage of available supporting and service troops in the
" CGAAFPOA ltr to CinCPOA, dtd 11Sep4 4
(no file or serial number), cited in Nichols an d
Shaw, Okinawa Victory, p. 15.
' CinCPOA ltr to ComFifthFlt, ComGenTen ,
and ComPhibsPac, Ser 000113, dtd 16Sep4 4
(OAB, NHD) .
12 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
POA for CAUSEWAY made it infeasible. 25 In an afterthought, on 4 October
Buckner wrote Nimitz that the need for
invading Formosa would be diminished
greatly if plans for the invasion of
Luzon came to fruition . 26
The minutes of the CominCh-CinCPac
conference held in San Francisco from
29 September to 1 October 1944, indicate
that by this time, Admiral King had
given serious thought to bypassing Formosa. He told Nimitz that, at his proposal, the Joint Logistics Committe e
(JLC) had made a survey of the
resources available for the Formosa operation, and that the report of this
committee was very discouraging. At the
time of its survey, the JLC found that
resources were not available for
CAUSEWAY, and would not be available unless Germany capitulated a long
time before it was expected to do so.
CinCPac then told King of General
Buckner's requirements for additional
men and equipment and that he, Nimitz ,
was in no position to dispute these figCG, Tenth Army ltr to CinCPOA, dtd
26Sep44, Subj : Feasibility of CAUSEWAY ,
cited in USAFMidPac G–5 Hist, p. 177. Concerning the Marine troop requirements fo r
Formosa, Lieutenant General Alexander A .
Vandegrift, Commandant of the Marin e
Corps, informed Admiral King that many o f
the service forces General Buckner had said
were needed to support the Marine component
of the Tenth Army were, in fact, alread y
organic to the Fleet Marine Force or else wer e
neither suited nor required for Marine Corp s
amphibious operations. CominCh-CNO Memo
to JCS, dtd 4Sep44, Subj : Employment of
Marine Divisions in "Formosa" Operation s
(OAB, NHD) .
28 CG, Tenth Army ltr to CinCPOA, dtd
40ct44, Subj : CAUSEWAY Objectives, cited
in USAFMidPac G–5 Hist, p . 179.
ures. Nimitz then submitted a memorandum recommending changes fo r
future Pacific operations based on th e
non-availability of necessary resources
and the favorable results of recent carrier operations. Admiral Nimitz recommended that CinCPac forces support the
SWPA invasion of Luzon with a target
date of 20 December 1944, and the invasions of Iwo Jima on 20 January 1945
and of Okinawa on 1 March by POA
Forces. 2 7
CinCPac stated that the proposal for
the SWPA forces to work up through
the Philippines from Leyte by shore-toshore operations had been discusse d
with President Roosevelt and Genera l
MacArthur at the Pearl Harbor conference in July. Because MacArthur ha d
stated that he could not undertake thes e
operations and in view of the insufficient
resources for Formosa, Nimitz believe d
that the best way to keep pressure on the
Japanese was for him to support the
Lingayen Gulf operation proposed by
MacArthur and to take the Bonins and
the Ryukyus with POA forces. 28
Admiral Sherman then told King that
Nimitz expected to take Iwo Jima with
two divisions and then to send in large
numbers of construction personnel t o
build up the airfields rapidly. Following
that, assuming that enemy air power on
Formosa had been neutralized by carrie r
strikes assisted by shore-based air from
Luzon, it was expected that Okinawa
would be invaded on 1 March. King
asked Nimitz why he was going to seize
the Bonins if Okinawa was to be taken .
27 Minutes, CominCh–CinCPac Conference ,
29Sep–lOct44, p . 4.
28 Ibid., p . 5 .
STRATEGIC BACKGROUND 1 3
Nimitz replied that fighters based in the
Bonins could give protection to th e
B—29s raiding Japan, and that the AAF
wanted this added protection.
King returned to Washington and o n
2 October proposed to the JCS a cours e
of action for the Pacific. He stated that
in view of the lack of necessary re -
sources in the POA for CAUSEWAY,
and because of the inability of the War
Department to make up the deficit befor e
the end of the war in Europe, he believe d
that operations should be mounted
against Luzon, Iwo Jima, and the
Ryukyus in succession. He also added
that CAUSEWAY might be feasible a t
a later date if conditions in the Pacific
and Europe warranted . 29 Concurring
with King's proposal, the next day the
JCS ordered MacArthur to invade Luzon
on 20 December 1944 and Admiral
Nimitz to land Marines on Iwo Jima on
20 January 1945. Following these operations, Operation ICEBERG was to be
launched on 1 March 1945. 3 ° This date
was flexible, however, since it would be
29 CominCh—CNO Memo to JCS dtd 20ct44 ,
Subj : Future Operations in the Pacific (OAB,
NHD) .
30 JCS 713/19, dtd 30ct44, cited in Nichol s
and Shaw, Okinawa Victory, p. 17 .
affected by the : (1) Capture of Iwo
Jima in time for the prompt release of
fire support units and close air support
squadrons required at Okinawa ; (2)
Prompt release of supporting naval
forces and assault shipping from th e
Luzon operation ; and (3) Attainment
of undisputed control of the sea and air
in the target area in preliminary strike s
against the Ryukyus, Formosa, and
Japan. 3 1
With all attention and efforts now
focused on the new objectives, th e
Formosan venture was reserved as a
strategic goal for possible future reconsideration. 32 Although the basic command concept and troop list organization
that had been set up for CAUSEWAY
were retained for employment in ICEBERG,33 there was much to be done
between the time that the JCS ordere d
the capture of Okinawa and the actua l
date of the invasion .
81 CinCPOA Joint Staff Study—ICEBERG,
dtd 250ct44, p . 1 (Okinawa AreaOp File,
HistBr, HQMC), hereafter ICEBERG Study.
"= JCS 713/19, dtd 30ct44, cited in Nichols
and Shaw, op. cit., p. 17 .
" Tenth Army AR, Ryukyus, 26Mar30Jun45, dtd 3Sep45, chap 3, p. 3 (Okinawa
Area Op File, HistBr, HQMC), hereafter
Tenth Army AR.
CHAPTER 2
The Japanese Situation 1
As early as the spring of 1944, the
high commands of the Japanese Army
and Navy in the Imperial General Headquarters (IGHQ) 2 had, with some accuracy, predicted the trend of America n
strategy in Pacific War. The Japanes e
foresaw that the turning point of th e
conflict would begin developing in March
or April in the Marianas. Further, the
military chiefs were concerned with
1 Unless otherwise indicated, the material i n
this chapter is derived from : Foreign Historie s
Div, G-3, Hq, U. S. Army Japan, Japanes e
Monograph No. 45, rev. ed. 1959, Histor y
of Imperial General Headquarters, Army Section (OCMH), hereafter IGHQ Hist; Robert
J. C. Butow, Japan's Decision to Surrende r
(Stanford : Stanford University Press, 1954) ,
hereafter Butow, Japan's Decision; Takushiro
Hattori, Dai Toa Senso Zenshi [The Complete
History of The Greater East Asia War], MS
trans, 4 vols (Tokyo : Matsu Publishing Co . ,
1955), v. IV (OCMH, DA), hereafter Wa r
History; Saburo Hayashi and Alvin Coox,
Kogun (Quantico : Marine Corps Association ,
1959), hereafter Hayashi and Coox, Kogun;
Toshikasu Kase, Journey to the Missouri, David
N. Rowe, ed. (New Haven : Yale Universit y
Press, 1950), hereafter Kase, Journey to the
Missouri; USSBS, Japan's Struggle to End th e
War (Washington : July 1946), hereafter
USSBS, Japan's Struggle.
2
IGHQ was only a term used to denote the
co-equal status and existence of the Tokyobased headquarters of the Army General Staff
and the Navy General Staff and their subordinate general and special staff sections. This
duality of command typified the Japanese military system not only at the highest level, bu t
in the lower echelons also.
what Japanese strategy should be at
this critical time .
Faced with an impending accelerate d
American drive in the Central Pacific,
IGHQ issued an Army-Navy agreemen t
for Japanese operations in that area .
The Navy was given primary responsibility for denying the Allies bases from
which further operations could be
launched against other islands and finally Japan itself. By the spring of
1944, defenses in the Carolines, Marianas, and Volcano Islands were to be
completed . Japanese Army units were
to reinforce the island defenses and
would operate under overall naval control in conducting ground operations. 3
A broader aspect of Japanese strategy
was the decision to try to entrap an d
defeat decisively a major portion of
U. S . naval forces. As island defense s
were being strengthened, the Japanes e
Navy committed the bulk of its aerial
strength—about 1,000 aircraft of which
only 650 were operational— 4 to the
Marianas and part of the remainder to
the Carolines. Meanwhile, surface force s
were to remain alert and ready to steam
into combat when the time to strike
arose.
Most IGHQ officers and government
officials alike were supremely confiden t
of winning the war and directed every
IGHQ Hist, p . 154.
J
Hayashi and Coox ; Kogun, p. 106.
14
THE JAPANESE SITUATION 1 5
effort to ensure an ultimate Japanese
victory. Not so certain that Japan was
going to be the victor was an oppositio n
group composed of former ministers,
cabinet members, and elder statesmen
(Jushin) who had opposed the war in
the pre-Pearl Harbor period . Also in
this group were some other influentia l
Japanese leaders who, while not holding positions of power, had given mer e
lip service to their nation's involvemen t
in a conflict. Rounding out the opposition were other formerly powerful men,
who had "retired" in the early years of
the war. The original doubts of the opposition gave it a basis for believing a s
early as the spring of 1944 that Japa n
was faced with inexorable defeat . These
beliefs were buttressed by a demonstration of the American determination to
fight aggressively and an ability t o
mount successful operations in the Pacific even before a second front had been
opened in Europe. Alone, these two
factors gave portents of disaster t o
those Japanese who were able to interpret them. 5
Between September 1943 and February 1944, Rear Admiral Sokichi Takagi,
chief of the Naval Ministry's researc h
section, prepared a study of Japanes e
lessons learned in the fighting to tha t
date. He maintained that it was impossible to continue the war and that
it was manifestly impossible for Japan
to win. He thus corroborated an estimate made by top Japanese naval officers before 1941 . At that time, the y
concluded that unless the war was wo n
before the end of 1943, Japan wa s
USSBS, Japan's Struggle, p. 2.
doomed, for it did not have the resource s
to continue the war after that time .
Takagi's study and his conclusions
were based on an analysis of fleet, air,
and merchant shipping losses as of th e
last of 1943. He pointed out the serious
difficulty Japan was facing in importin g
essential materials, high-level confusion
regarding war aims and the direction
of the war and the growing feelin g
among some political and military leaders that General Hideki Tojo, Prime
Minister since 1941, should be remove d
from office .
Takagi stated also that both the possibility of American bombing raids o n
Japan and the inability of the Japanese
to obtain essential raw and finishe d
products dictated that the nation shoul d
seek a compromise peace immediately.
In March he presented his findings
orally to two influential naval officers,
Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai, a former
prime minister, and Vice Admiral Seib i
Inouye, who employed the facts of the
study to induce other members of the
opposition to take firm steps to help
change the course that Japan was travelling. 6
Less than two months after the invasion of Normandy in June 1944 ,
Japanese leaders began receiving reports of the massive numbers of men
and amount of materiel that the Allies
were able to land unopposed each day
on the French coast. As a Japanese
foreign ministry official later wrote :
That was more than enough to dishearten us, the defenses of our hom e
islands were far more vulnerable than th e
European invasion coast. Our amazemen t
Ibid., p . 3.
16 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
was boundless when we saw the American
forces land on Saipan only ten days after
D day in Europe. The Allies could execute
simultaneous full-scale offensives in both
European and Asiatic theaters 1 7
By all accounts, Japanese and other ,
what really tipped the scales in favo r
of an eventual Allied victory in the Pacific, and more immediately caused the
fall of the Tojo government, were th e
landings at Saipan and Japanese losse s
in the First Battle of the Philippine Sea.
Only 1,350 miles from Tokyo, Saipan
constituted one of the most vital points
in the Japanese outer defense system.
Toshikasu Kase, the foreign ministry
official quoted above, wrote that th e
island :
. . . was so strongly defended that it wa s
considered impregnable. More than once I
was told by the officers of the General Staff
that Saipan was absolutely invincible . Our
Supreme Command, however, made a strategic miscalculation. Anticipating an early
attack on Palau Island, they transferre d
there the main fleet and the land-based air
forces in order to deal a smashing blow
to the hostile navy. The result was that
Saipan, lacking both naval and air protection, proved surprisingly vulnerable . 8
An even greater disaster befell the
Japanese in the Battle of the Philippine
Sea, 19–20 June 1944. This two-day
conflict began when carrier-based air -
craft of the Japanese First Mobile Fleet
attacked Admiral Spruance's Fifth Fleet
while it covered the Saipan operation .
On the first day, two U. S. battleships,
two carriers, and a heavy cruiser wer e
damaged ; the Japanese lost over 300
aircraft and two carriers. Pilots from
Vice Admiral Marc A. Mitscher's fast
° Kase, Journey to the Missouri, p . 90 .
° Ibid., p . 73.
carrier task force struck back violently
the next day, sinking another enemy
carrier and downing many Japanese
planes. According to American estimates, their opponents suffered staggering losses in the two days : 426
carrier planes and 31 float planes. In
addition, the Americans claimed that
approximately 50 Guam-based aircraf t
had been destroyed. 9
Japanese sources confirm the loss o f
carriers and state that four others of
the nine committed in the fight wer e
damaged. Enemy records show that of
the 360 carrier-based aircraft sent to
attack the American fleet, only 25 survived. "Although no battleships or
cruisers were sunk, . . . the loss of aircraft carriers proved an almost fata l
blow to the Japanese navy. With the
loss of the decisive aerial and nava l
battles, the Marianas were lost ." 10 Despite this thorough defeat, most Japanes e
were told that it was a glorious victor y
for them ; "it was customary for GH
[IGHQ] to make false announcements
of victory in utter disregard of facts,
and for the elated and complacent public to believe in them." 1 1
Although the Japanese government
did not announce its losses in the Battle
of the Philippine Sea—or that it ha d
even lost the battle—news of the fall o f
Saipan was made public. Upon learning
this in July, an opposition group consisting mainly of Jushin determined to
° Samuel Eliot Morison, New Guinea and
the Marianas—History of United States Nava l
Operations in World War II, v . VIII (Boston :
Little, Brown and Company, 1960), pp. 319-
321.
10 IGHQ Hist, p . 172.
11 Kase, Journey to the Missouri, p . 74.
THE JAPANESE SITUATION 1 7
overthrow the Tojo regime, and force d
the Prime Minister to resign from office on 18 July 1944.
The problems facing Japan wer e
hardly resolved with the appointmen t
and installation of General Kuniaki
Koiso as premier. The Japanese Army
was still a political power, capable o f
dictating the rise, fall, and course of
government, and Tojo and his followers
remained uncontrite in their adherenc e
to a chauvinistic program of Japanes e
conquest and supremacy. Although the
Home Islands had not yet experienced
the devastation and chaos to be brought
by the vast Allied air raids, after the
fall of Saipan a number of critical domestic problems affecting the war effort
faced the Japanese government . The
output of a number of essential item s
fell below peak requirements, and sever e
shipping losses reduced the amount o f
raw and finished material reaching
Japanese shores to a point far short of
needs.
On the home front, despite its unhappiness with Tojo and his handling o f
the war, the Japanese public was confident in ultimate victory. Those leaders
in government opposed to the war, op -
position leaders behind the scenes, and
some of the war hawks, too., began t o
have greater misgivings as they learned
of previous defeats and potential disasters. As this knowledge spread, the
military factions slowly lost face and
became discredited, but not until the
last months of the war did they lose
power.
Nonetheless, confident of their ability
to guide Japan to what they considered
would be a just victory, the military
leaders made adjustment after adjustment in strategy and troop dispositions
in one area after another as the Allied
threat to the Home Islands intensifie d
and accelerated . On the other hand, it
is possible to understand their reluctance to view the situation realistically .
From their earliest days, Japanese citizens were taught to believe that the
one alternative to victory was death and
that surrender was so disgraceful as to
be unthinkable . And the high comman d
planned, therefore, to continue the war ,
even on Japanese soil if necessary, but
to fight to the finish in any case.
Even lower ranking Japanese Arm y
and Navy officers, many of them products of a prewar conscript system, wh o
very often came from peasant families,
held the same beliefs as their seniors
regarding honor and obedience and the
disgrace of surrendering . The code of
the samurai had been all-pervasive for
many years and had influenced the attitude and outlook of nearly every face t
of Japanese society .
IGHQ took steps for the defense of
the homeland as early as the beginnin g
of 1944, when it perceived the cours e
that the war was taking and judged
what future American strategy was to
be. Japanese strategists believed that
Allied forces would attack Japan prope r
from the direction of the Marianas and
through the Philippines. The Tokyo
headquarters prepared for this eventuality by setting up a defense line along
the sea front connecting the Philippines,
Formosa, the Ryukyu Islands, the Japanese homeland, and the Kurile Islands,
and strengthened the garrisons on each .
According to this plan, the Japanes e
would concentrate their full strength
18 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
to destroy the Allied threat at whateve r
point it developed.
A schedule of four prepared reactions,
called the Sho-Go operations, was drawn
up. For the defense of Formosa and th e
Nansei group, Sho-Go No. 2, IGHQ
placed the Thirty-second Army under
the command of the Formosa Army in
July 1944, and added two divisions to
the order of battle of the former. In
the 10 months between the landing on
Saipan and the invasion of Okinawa ,
Japanese strength was built up in the
Ryukyus from an estimated 10,000 to
approximately 155,000 air, ground, an d
naval troops. 1 2
For the defense of the Philippines,
the high command had planned Sho-Go
No. 1 . Based on a decision of the Imperial War Council on 19 August 1944,
Japan staked her national destiny on
the outcome of the impending battle of
Leyte. 13 It was here that the Army and
Navy had to destroy the Americans.
The critical losses sustained by the Combined Fleet in the four-day battle for
Leyte Gulf, 23–26 October 1944, three
days after the invasion of Leyte, and th e
inability of ground forces to contai n
the invaders, created a grave threat t o
Japanese hegemony in the Western Pacific and even more so to the safety of
Japan proper. Allied task forces dominated the waters surrounding Japa n
proper and the East and South China
Seas as well. An additional liability resulting from American successes was
the concomitant loss of airdromes fro m
12 MID, WD, Disposition and Movement of
Japanese Ground Forces, 1941-1945, dtd
10Dec45 (OAB, NHD) .
la Hattori, War History, p. 1.
which land-based planes could pumme l
Japan unmercifully.
Seeing that no good purpose would
be served by prolonging the Leyte operation, IGHQ decided to withdraw
Japanese forces from the island and to
conduct delaying tactics elsewhere i n
the Philippines. The Luzon landing in
January 1945 made it apparent tha t
there was no further way of holding off
the Americans. From November 194 4
on, American air attacks on Tokyo,
Nagoya, Osaka, and northern Kyush u
increased in intensity, destroying grea t
sections of these areas and seriousl y
impeding the war effort.
In January, the overall IGHQ estimate of the situation concluded that
although Japan and Germany had suffered many reverses, the Axis ha d
exacted a heavy penalty of their enemy .
In viewing the Japanese cause in th e
same way that the viewed the Emperor
and sacred homeland—through an emotional and reverent haze— 14 the senior
commanders concluded that "the final
victory will be for those who will stand
up against increasing hardship and wil l
fight to the last with a firm belief in
ultimate victory ." 15 While it acknowledged that the defeat of Germany woul d
mean the unleashing of tremendousl y
powerful forces against Japan, IGHQ
believed that one of the major America n
problems would be in the area of manpower mobilization. The Japanese commanders hoped that, tiring of the war,
the American people would favor its
end. 1 6
14 USSBS, Japan's Struggle, p . 2.
16 IGHQ Hist, p. 236.
"
Ibid.
THE JAPANESE SITUATION 1 9
Believing that the United States
wanted to terminate the war quickly,
IGHQ speculated that American force s
would take the shortest possible route
leading to Japan. This estimate fore -
saw that after the landings in the Philippines, the Allies would move to Formosa, Okinawa, and Iwo Jima . Based
on the fact that most Japanese suppl y
lines to the south had been well interdicted early in 1945, and an interpretation of radio intelligence reports, it
seemed very likely that Iwo Jima was
to be attacked in the very near future. "
IGHQ also speculated that America n
forces would land on mainland China i n
southern Kwantung and Hongkong . "
In the face of the impending invasio n
and to strengthen homeland defenses
further, IGHQ planned a large-scal e
mobilization of all segments of the population. In October 1944, when th e
government invoked general mobilization, there were 6,390,000 reservists
available for call-up. Of these, 4,690,000
were ready for immediate assignmen t
to active duty. There was a problem,
however, of achieving a proper balanc e
in the armed forces, since a shortage of
trained technical personnel existed .
Moreover, of the approximately 87 percent of the Japanese adult population
already employed in the vital food an d
munitions industries, 47 percent wer e
reservists and not available unless the
war effort was to be damaged . "
1R Ibid., p . 239.
"
Chief, War History Office, Defense Agency
of Japan, ltr to Hd, HistBr, G—3 Div, HQMC,
dtd 4Feb66, hereafter War History Office
Comments.
19 Ibid.
310-224 0 - 69 - 3
Further, at this late stage in the war,
all branches of science were mobilized
in the faint hope that they could develop
surprise attack weapons. Unfortunately
for this program, students at Army
schools and serving officers were not
very well trained in scientific and technological subjects ; because of the nature
of their duties and the weapons whic h
the Navy employed, naval officers were
in a little better position. The Army,
however, was and always had been th e
dominant military authority in Japan,
and as in the past, determined how th e
country would fight a war. Nevertheless, as the Japanese war situation deteriorated, military leaders optimisticall y
sought the development of miraculously
effective weapons.
Nonetheless, it became abundantly clear
that the low scientific level of the nation
could not possibly yield elaborate weapons.
. . . The Army's attitude toward technology incurred many kinds of great
criticism from private sources at the time ,
the major points being the following :
The Army keeps matters tightly secret .
The Army has a great predilection for
bamboo-spear tactics, and has little understanding of technology . . .
.2 0
Despite the many imposing obstacle s
looming ahead, IGHQ prepared to execute a protracted war in the Japanes e
islands. The command headquarters
made itself the supreme authority for
the operation of the war and took step s
to see that the governmental structure
would be revised so that the Prime
Minister would have comparable authority over political matters. In addition, the entire nation was to be mobilized and all citizens capable of bearing
20 Hayashi and Coox, Kgun, pp. 118-119.
20 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
weapons were to be armed. Key industries as well as the communications an d
transportation facilities were to be reorganized and operated by the stat e
along rigidly controlled lines. 2 1
As Japan was already a corporate
state, i.e ., a nation in which the government controlled every facet of industry
and all other productive areas, and sinc e
military control of the state had been
a fact of life from the time that Japan
embarked upon her course of conquest
in the early 1930s, there was little ne w
in this revised policy, except for one
phrase, " . . . in a military manner. "
This was a naked declaration of military
ascendancy and control over all govern -
mental functions. Even Tojo had given
lip service to civilian primacy in nonmilitary matters. But opposition elements were not yet strong enough to
take over the reins of government and
to begin steps to sue for a negotiated
peace ; the militarists were still in
power, and they continued preparations
for a last-ditch fight.
IGHQ remained convinced the America was wearying of the war and that,
even if this were not so, Japanes e
ground strength of some 4,747,000 men
in uniform—a million and a half o f
whom were based in Japan— 22 was
enough to prevent the Americans from
reaching Japanese shores. If invaders
did attempt to come ashore, homelan d
defense forces would drive them back
into the sea. At the beginning of 194 5
21 Hattori, War History, p . 5.
OCMH, DA Estimate of Japanese Strength
and Disposition of Forces, dtd Oct55, File No .
320.2, Geographic V—Japan (OCMH) . This
collation was derived from authoritative American intelligence sources published in 1945 .
a large proportion of Japanese troop
strength overall was tied down in Chin a
and Manchuria, however, and a smaller
portion was isolated in the Central and
Southwest Pacific, where replacements,
reinforcements, and replenishment coul d
not be sent. Nor could these units be
withdrawn to Japan or elsewhere, so
complete was the Allied encirclement .
For all practical purposes, the units i n
the Pacific were lost to Japan and out
of the war for good.
In late 1944 and early 1945, American
bombings, fast carrier task force raids,
and especially the submarine blockad e
had increased in intensity and reduced
the Japanese north-south maritime shipments to a mere trickle, so that the economic structure of that country was
slowly forced to a halt. Undoubtedly,
the single most effective agent in this
action was the blockade imposed by th e
ships of the U. S. Pacific submarine fleet.
American submarines torpedoed or destroyed by gunfire 60 percent of the
2,117 Japanese merchant vessels, totalling 7,913,858 tons, sunk by American
forces during the war. In addition, U. S.
underseas forces accounted for 201 of
the 686 enemy warships sunk in World
War II. 2 3
On 13 January 1945, IGHQ was
startled to learn that an entire convo y
of nine tankers and its escort squadro n
had been sunk off Qui Nhon, a town
on the east coast of French Indo-China .
In face of this crowning blow and t o
23 JANAC, Japanese Naval and Merchant
Ship Losses (Feb47), pp. vi, vii, cited in
Samuel Eliot Morrison, Leyte, June 1944 —
January 1945—History of United States Naval
Operations in World War II, v. XII (Boston :
Little, Brown and Company, 1958), p . 413.
THE JAPANESE SITUATION 21
evade American planes and submarines ,
the Japanese devised a new system employing small convoys guarded by dispersed escorts instead of the larger
convoys and concentrated escorts sen t
out previously . Even this method failed
when air and naval bases on Luzon became operational and American attacks
from the island quickened in pace with
the submarine attacks.
At the beginning of March 1945,
IGHQ stopped sending convoys to the
south ; northbound convoys carrying
essential war material continued the attempt to reach Japanese ports, however.
Some 70 to 80 percent of the ships neve r
made it. Later in the month, Tokyo
ordered shipping halted altogether. 24
The noose around Japan was drawin g
tighter and tighter.
Since February, IGHQ had received
a mounting influx of reports of increasingly larger numbers of American convoys operating in the vicinity of th e
Marianas and Ulithi. On 12 February,
Tokyo was alerted to the movement of a
sizable task force heavily protected b y
carriers and headed towards Iwo Jima.
On the 16th, IGHQ was certain that th e
Bonins were the American target. When
the actual invasion of Iwo began three
days later, there was litle doubt that
Okinawa would be next. 2 5
In March, the Army and Navy concluded yet another agreement concerning joint defense operations, this one
establishing responsibilities for containing Allied advances into the East
China Sea. According to the plan, when
American task forces approached this
=4 Hattori, War History, p. 6 .
26 IGHQ Hist, p . 256 .
area, Army and Navy air elements
would mount massive attacks against
the convoys. Included in the Japanes e
aerial formations were to be special
aircraft flown by pilots trained in suicide tactics.
At the end of the month, Japanes e
air strength available for the defens e
of Okinawa was as follows :
8th Air Division (Army), Formosa ;
120 fighters, 60 bombers, 10 reconnaissance planes, 250 special attack planes.
The targets of the latter were American
transports.
Sixth Air Army (Army), Japan ; 90
fighters, 90 bombers, 45 reconnaissanc e
aircraft, and 300 special attack plane s
were assigned to attack American transports; 60 fighters, 30 bombers, 20 recon -
naissance aircraft, and 100 special attack planes were assigned to strike task
force carriers, and Ryukuyan airfields
when captured by the Americans. An
additional 400 fighters and 45 reconnaissance planes were assigned to fl y
combat air patrols.
First Air Fleet (Navy), Formosa ; 40
fighters, 40 bombers, 5 reconnaissance
planes.
Third Air Fleet (Navy), Japan ; 40
fighters, 30 bombers, and 20 reconnaissance planes.
Fifth Air Fleet (Navy), Japan ; 200
fighters, 310 bombers, and 10 reconnaissance aircraft.
Tenth Air Fleet (Navy), Japan ; 700
combat planes, 1,300 training planes.
This fleet was a reserve force, and its
aircraft were to be employed as specia l
attack planes. According to the ArmyNavy agreement, the Navy planes were
to attack the U. S. task forces and the
escort shipping guarding them. To en-
22 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
large the number of special attack units,
both the Army and the Navy were t o
indoctrinate their pilots "in the spiri t
of suicide attacks. " -' "
From early January until the middl e
of March, American carrier-based pilot s
had battered Formosa and Okinawa i n
an aerial onslaught that showed no signs
of letting up. It seemed inevitable to
the Imperial General Headquarters that
the U. S. move following Iwo would b e
against the Ryukyus. Late in March,
the Tokyo command received word tha t
American forces had steamed out o f
anchorages at Ulithi and in the Marianas. During the same period, fast carrier task force aircraft pummelled
Okinawa with from 500 to 700 sorties
daily. The prologue to the grand climax
was reached on 26 March when the
Kerama Retto was invaded ; Okinawa's
time was not far off.
Despite the clear indication that Okinawa was the major U . S. target, Japanese air strength had dwindled to th e
point where it was in no condition to
contest the landing. The Fifth Air Fleet,
"e IGHQ Hist, pp. 274-275, 277-278.
with a major assignment in the defens e
of the Ryukyus, had been soundl y
crushed in February when America n
fast carriers visited Kyushu. The other
major air commands slated for important roles in protecting Okinawa either
were not yet deployed in positions from
which they could fly out to hold back
the impending invasion or, having been
severely punished in earlier American
attacks, were unable to strike back.
Japanese naval strength was hardl y
in better condition. The fleet was in woefully sad shape and unbalanced . The
high toll in the loss of its carriers, destroyers, and aircraft had left it in a
pitiable condition, while the overall
shortage of fuel would have immobilize d
it in any case. By March 1945, it "was
nothing but a partially paralyzed surviving unit." 2 7
Following the news of the fall of Iwo
Jima, the Thirty-second Army on Okinawa stood wary—listening, waiting ,
and watching for an invasion force to
appear over the horizon. Its expectations were soon to be fulfilled .
27 Hattori, War History, p . 26 .
CHAPTER 3
Marine Corps Order of Battle 1
In July 1940, the Marine Corps ha d
28,000 men in uniform. The January
1945 strength figure of the Corps reflected some 421,605 Marines, men an d
women ; before the end of the war., this
number was to become even larger.
Broken down, the Marine Corps January strength figure represented : FMF
ground forces, 212,165 ; aviation, 125,-
162 ; sea-going Marines, 9,430 ; foreign
and domestic naval and shore activities ,
54,483 ; Women's Reserve, 18,365. In
addition to the above and not include d
in the overall total were 16,017 doctors ,
1 Unless otherwise indicated, the material in
this chapter is derived from : CMC AnRpt t o
SecNav for the Fiscal Year Ending 30Jun45 ,
hereafter CMC Rpt 1945 (CMC Rpts for othe r
years will be cited CMC Rpt with year) ;
DivAvn, HQMC, OpD, Jan45 (AdminFile ,
HistBr, HQMC), hereafter DivAvn OpD with
date ; G—1 Sec, Div P&P, HQMC, OpDs,
7Dec4l-31Dec44 and Jan45 (AdminFile HistBr, HQMC), hereafter G—1 OpD with date ;
CO, 1st ProvHistPlat, FMF, MS, "Historica l
Outline of the Development of Fleet Marine
Force, Pacific, 1941—1950 (Preliminary)," 195 1
(HistBr, HQMC), hereafter FMFPac Hist;
Kenneth W. Condit, Gerald Diamond, an d
Edwin T. Turnbladh, Marine Corps Ground
Training in World War II (Washington :
HistBr, G—3 Div, HQMC, 1956), hereafte r
Condit, Diamond, and Turnbladh, Marine Corps
Training ; George McMillan, The Old Breed :
A History of the First Marine Division in
World War II (Washington : Infantry Journa l
Press, 1949), hereafter McMillan, The Ol d
Breed; Richard W. Johnston, Follow Me! The
Story of the Second Marine Division in Worl d
War II (New York : Random House, 1948) ,
hereafter Johnston, 2d MarDiv Hist ; IstLts
hospital corpsmen, and other naval personnel assigned to the Marine Corps. 2
In the beginning of 1945, no major
Marine ground force as such was engaged in a major operation against th e
enemy. The 2d Division on Saipan an d
the 3d on Guam, where veterans and
new replacements alike participated i n
on-the-job training, however, were mop -
ping up survivors of the major Japanese
defense garrisons which were defeated
when those islands were officially declared secured in 1944 .
The senior Marine commander in the
Pacific at this time was Lieutenant General Holland M. Smith, Commandin g
General, Fleet Marine Force, Pacifi c
Robert A. Aurthur and Kenneth Cohlmia . The
Third Marine Division (Washington : Infantr y
Journal Press, 1948), hereafter Aurthur an d
Cohlmia, 3d MarrDiv Hist ; Carl W. Proehl, ed . ,
The Fourth Marine Division in World War II
(Washington : Infantry Journal Press, 1946) ,
hereafter Proehl, 4th MarDiv Hist ; Howar d
M. Conner, The Spearhead : The World War II
History of the 5th Marine Division (Washington : Infantry Journal Press, 1950), hereafter
Conner, 5th MarDiv Hist; Bevan G. Cass, ed. ,
History of the Sixth Marine Division (Washington : Infantry Journal Press, 1948) here -
after Cass, 6th MarDiv Hist; Robert Sherrod,
History of Marine Corps Aviation in World
War II (Washington : Combat Forces Press,
1952), hereafter Sherrod, Marine Air Hist.
2 G—1 OpDs, 7Dec4l-31Dec44 and Jan45 ;
FMF Status Rpts, Ground and Air for Jan45 ,
prepared by G—3 Sec, Div P&P, HQMC (Pers
and Loc File, HistBr, HQMC), hereafter FMF
Grd (or Air) Status Rpt with month. See App
F for a complete location and strength breakdown of the FMF as of 30Apr45 .
23
24 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
(FMFPac) . 3 His was a type command
which involved administrative control
only over FMFPac units . 4 The majority
of Marine combat troops were located
in the Central Pacific under Admira l
Spruance's control. By January 1945,
six Marine divisions had been activated,
grouped three each in two corps. Headquarters of Major General Roy S .
Geiger's III Amphibious Corps (IIIAC )
was on Guadalcanal, where Major General Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., based his
6th Marine Division. On Pavuvu in th e
Russells, approximately 65 miles northwest of Guadalcanal, was the 1st Marine
Division commanded by Major General
Pedro A. del Valle. Also in IIIAC wa s
Major General Thomas E. Watson's 2d
Marine Division on Saipan . The other
major Marine ground command under
FMFPac, V Amphibious Corps (VAC) ,
was headed by Major General Harry
Schmidt, whose headquarters wa s
located on Maui, Hawaiian Islands.
Also on Maui in VAC was Major General Clifton B. Cates' 5 4th Marine Division. On the island of Hawaii was Majo r
General Keller E . Rockey and his 5th
Marine Division, and on Guam was th e
3d Marine Division of Major General
Graves B . Erskine.
All six divisions had long been in receipt of orders for their next combat
' For the history of FMFPac, see Garand
and Strobridge, "Western Pacific Operations. "
' Generally, a type commander has an administrative mission only and has no tactical responsibilities. For the Iwo Jima operation,
General Smith was assigned an additiona l
tactical responsibility as Commander, Expeditionary Troops.
' Generals Cates and Shepherd later became
the 19th and 20th Commandants of the Marine
Corps, respectively.
assignments and were actively engage d
in preparing for them. Authorized
strength for a Marine division at this
time was 856 officers and 16,069 enlisted
Marines. The 1st, 2d, and 3d Divisions
were short a few officers, while the 3d
Division was short 271 enlisted men an d
the 6th Division, 513. Replacement
drafts had been assigned to the divisions, however, and were in transit to
join them either before or just after the
impending landings. In January 1945,
11 replacement drafts, containing 14,-
331 Marines and naval corpsmen an d
doctors, were either en route to or in
the process of joining the six Marin e
divisions at the staging areas . °
In addition to the combat divisions,
there were other FMF organizations
spread throughout the Pacific undertaking assigned support, garrison, o r
defense missions. A total of 74,474
Marines and naval personnel was involved in the operations of these units. ?
Two provisional field service commands,
one at Guam and the other at Guadalcanal, and seven field depots and fou r
service and supply battalions based in
close proximity to the Marine divisions
provided major supply support in th e
Pacific. Also available from FMFPa c
for support of and attachment to the
two corps for upcoming operations wer e
a variety of other units. These included
11 antiaircraft artillery battalions, 6
155mm gun and 6 155mm howitzer
battalions, 3 armored amphibian battalions, 9 amphibian tractor battalions,
and 6 amphibian truck companies.
In January, most of these organizations were a part of the III and V
° FMF Grd Status Rpt, Jan 45.
7 Ibid.
MARINE CORPS ORDER OF BATTLE 2 5
Amphibious Corps, although a few of
the antiaircraft artillery battalions wer e
still fulfilling island defense missions.
Within FMFPac also were such othe r
types of organizations as defense battalions, Joint Assault Signal Companies
(JASCOs), provisional rocket detachments, war dog platoons, motor transport battalions, corps evacuation hospitals, bomb disposal companies, an d
separate engineer battalions ; not all of
them would be employed in future operations.
The highest level Marine aviation
echelon in the Pacific, Aircraft, Flee t
Marine Force, Pacific (AirFMFPac),
was commanded by Major Genera l
Francis P. Mulcahy, whose headquarters
was at Ewa, on the island of Oahu. A
type command like FMFPac, AirFMFPac organized, administered, supplied,
and deployed all Marine aviation squadrons in the Pacific, but controlled
none. The four Marine aircraft wings
(MAWs) in AirFMFPac were based o n
islands at widespread points in the
Pacific. Included in the four wings wa s
a total of 16 Marine aircraft group s
(MAGs) holding 70 tactical squadrons
broken down as follows : 28 fighter
(VMFs) ; 14 scout bomber (VMSBs) ; 7
bomber (VMBs) ; 7 transport (VMRs) ;
5 night fighter (VMF(N)s) ; 5 observation (VMOs) ; and 3 torpedo bombe r
(VMTBs) .
Major General Ralph J. Mitchell's 1st
MAW headquarters was on Bougainville. He had under his command si x
MAGs ; three of the groups and part of
a fourth were assigned to CinCSWP A
for the Philippines campaign ; and one
squadron of a fifth group was en route
to join MacArthur. MAG–25, the latter
group, and the portions of the other two
not committed in the Philippines, wer e
based on Emirau, Green Island, Manus ,
and Cape Torokina at Bougainville. 8
(See Map XI, Map Section.) A transport group, MAG–25 also had anothe r
designation, SCAT (South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command), and a s
such, with a few AAF transport squadrons assigned from time to time flew
many extensive air supply missions al l
over the Pacific from the time it wa s
activated, 24 November 1942, until the
end of the war. When available for suc h
an assignment, the group also evacuated casualties from captured islands
which had strips capable of sustaining
the operations of transport-type aircraft.
Headquarters of the 2d MAW was at
Ewa. Major General James T. Moore
had only one MAG within his command
at this time, and it was based on
Espiritu Santo, in the New Hebrides.
The reason that the wing was so depleted in January was that in mid-1944
most of Moore's squadrons had been
transferred to the 4th MAW, and at th e
end of the year his command became
the nucleus for Tactical Air Force ,
Tenth Army, and assigned as a task
unit for the invasion of Okinawa .
The 3d Marine Aircraft Wing was
commanded for the first seven days i n
January 1945 by Colonel Ford 0 .
Rogers, who was relieved on the 8th by
Colonel Byron F. Johnson. The wing
had its headquarters command and a
group at Ewa, and a MAG based on
' Green Island is approximately 80 miles
north of the tip of Bougainville, and Manus is
280 miles southeast of Emirau and 80 miles
north of the northeast coast of New Guinea .
26 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Midway. Four fighter squadrons of the
Ewa-based group were on carriers an d
supported the Lingayen landings in January and later flew strikes against
Luzon, Formosa, and Indochina. Essex
carried two of the VMFs, and Wasp the
other two. The primary mission of 3d
MAW was to train AirFMFPac tactica l
squadrons and pilots in night-fighting ,
air-warning, and radar-bombing techniques.
Major General Louis E . Woods' 4t h
MAW was based on Majuro in th e
Marshalls, and with seven groups
located on islands all over the Central
Pacific, his was the largest of the fou r
AirFMFPac wings. From airfields on
such widely separated islands as those
in the Marshalls, Marianas, and Palaus,
Woods' squadrons took off day after da y
to neutralize bypassed Japanese defenses. Although boring and seemingly
prosaic in nature, important benefits
derived from the operations of the 4th
Wing squadrons in neutralizing the
Marshalls. "The 4th MAW's perfection
of the napalm fire jelly formula was a
big contribution to the rest of the
Pacific. Also important was the development of the fighter bomber, that trusty
weapon so sorely needed when more
planes had to be had to save the fleet
from the Kamikaze." 9
There were two other major aviation
commands in the Marine Corps ; these
were based on each coast of the United
States and held similar missions. At
San Diego, Marine Fleet Air, West
Coast, administered, operated, trained,
and equipped all Marine aviation organ -
Sherrod, Marine Air Hist, p. 246 .
izations on the west coast ; it also channelled personnel and materiel to AirFMFPac for further deployment in th e
Pacific. The east coast training command was the 9th MAW, with headquarters at the Marine Corps Air Station, Cherry Point, N. C. Within these
two commands were 14 groups—6 on
the west coast and 8 on the east. There
were in turn a total of 100 tactical and
29 training squadrons of various types
in the groups. On the west coast wer e
22 carrier squadrons, 16 fighter
(VMF(CVS)) and 6 torpedo bombing
(VMTB(CVS)), that were slated to g o
aboard new Commencement Bay-class
escort carriers as soon as the latter had
completed shake-down trials.
At the beginning of 1945, Marine
Corps aviation had already passed
through a period of expansion and wa s
entering an era of consolidation with
respect to its ultimate objectives in the
war effort. Three months earlier, i n
October 1944, the Chief of Naval Operations had approved a plan to man fou r
of the new class of escort carriers with
Marine squadrons. Accordingly, that
same month, the Marine Corps redesignated two groups already in existenc e
on the west coast as Marine Air Support Groups (MASGs) . By January
1945, the VMF (CVS) s and VMTB-
(CVS) s were ready to begin a period o f
intense training from the decks of th e
carriers and at their former home bases ,
the Marine Corps Air Stations at El
Centro and Mojave, in California . To
each MASG was attached a Marine
Carrier Group (MCVG), composed of
a fighter and a torpedo bombing squadron ; one of six Carrier Aircraft Service Detachments was to complete the
MARINE CORPS ORDER OF BATTLE 27
Marine complement in the carriers after
the detachments had been organized on
the west coast in February.
To enable Marine Corps aviation "to
give support to the Fleet Marine Force
in landing operations" more effectively
in the future, the Navy approved a
major revision of the Corps aviatio n
structure at the beginning of 1945 .
Marine Corps planners envisioned a
program encompassing balanced landbased and carrier-based aviation forces,
which would be soundly supported b y
shore activities. Not all of the Marine
carrier program went into effect befor e
the end of the war, but its progress wa s
such that the validity of basing Marine
squadrons in the flattops was proven .
Fleet Marine Force ground training
facilities in 1945 had advanced far beyond those in existence at the beginning
of the war. In addition to base command
housekeeping and training units, Camp
Lejeune had 10 battalions undergoing
infantry training in January 1945 an d
Camp Pendleton had 12 . Besides this
number, Camp Pendleton housed four
replacement drafts, a total of som e
5,000 Marines, who were awaiting shipment to the Pacific. With the record
number of six Marine divisions in the
field, the constant demand for replacements and the heavy burden impose d
upon the training command continued
incessantly.
As IIIAC and VAC completed their
training phases and began combat loading for the trip to the target areas, the
anticipated demands for replacement o f
expected casualties on Iwo Jima and
Okinawa were already being met by th e
organization and training of new replacement drafts. As each Marine
destined for assignment to a comba t
organization in the Pacific left th e
United States, he was aware that his
was the same path taken by fellow
Marines who had fought at such now -
famous places as Guadalcanal, Bougain -
ville, and Tarawa. His sole consolation,
if one was needed, was the knowledge
that, although he had not participated
in the beginning of the fight, he migh t
possibly be there to help end it.

PART II
Okinawa

CHAPTER 1
The Target and the Enemy
BACKGROUND '
Once the Joint Chiefs of Staff decide d
on Okinawa as a future target, intensive
planning and preparations were begu n
for the assault on this once obscure
island . Large amounts of information of
varying importance poured into the intelligence centers concerned with the
impending operation, and were added to
1 Unless otherwise indicated, the material in
this chapter is derived from : HQUSAFPOA
G–2 Study of Okinawa Gunto, n .d ., hereafter
HQUSAFPOA Study ; MIS, WD, Survey of the
Nansei Shoto, dtd 15Feb43, hereafter WD
Survey ; War Reports; USSBS (Pac), NavAnalysisDiv, The Campaigns of the Pacific
War (Washington, 1946), hereafter USSBS ,
Campaigns; Roy E. Appleman, et. at., Okinawa: The Last Battle—U. S. Army in World
War II—The War in the Pacific (Washington :
HistDiv, DA, 1948), hereafter, Appleman, et.
at., Okinawa Battle ; Wesley Frank Craven and
James Lea Cate, eds., The Pacific : Matterhor n
to Nagasaki—The Army Air Forces in World
War II, v. 5 (Chicago : The University of
Chicago Press, 1953), hereafter Craven an d
Cate, Matterhorn to Nagasaki; Jeter A. Isely
and Philip A. Growl, The U. S. Marines an d
Amphibious War (Princeton : Princeton University Press, 1951), hereafter Isely and
Growl, Marines and Amphibious War; Nichols
and Shaw, Okinawa Victory. Documents not
otherwise identified in this part are located i n
the following files of the HistBr, HQMC : Unit
Historical Reports; Okinawa Area Operations ;
Publications ; Aviation ; and Okinawa Monograph and Comments. Because Appleman,
et. at., Okinawa Battle, and Nichols and Shaw,
Okinawa Victory have served as guidelines for
pt II, hereafter they will be cited in direct
reference only.
files already bulging with a store of
knowledge of the Ryukyus group . Okinawa soon became the focus of attentio n
of the CinCPac-CinCPOA headquarters
and staff members who, in compliance
with the JCS directive to Admiral
Nimitz ". . . . to occupy one or more positions in the Nansei Shoto," 2 filled in
the details of an outline plan. A flurry
of disciplined activity immediately engulfed the commands and staffs of the
expeditionary forces assigned to the
assault as they began their operationa l
studies for ICEBERG, the code-name
given to the approaching invasion .
The strategic importance of Okinawa
was its location, and all other considerations stemmed from this. The Japanes e
viewed it as an integral link in a chain
of islands, the Ryukyus or the Nanse i
Shoto, which formed an effective barrier to an Allied advance from the east
or southeast towards the Chinese mainland, Korea, or the western coast o f
Japan. This group of islands was ideally
situated to aid in the protection of the
Japanese maritime lines of supply an d
communication to imperial conquests i n
southeast Asia . The island chain als o
provided the Japanese Navy with the
only two substantial fleet anchorage s
south of the Home Islands 3 between
2 ICEBERG Study, p . 1.
' The Home Islands were generally considered to consist of the four principal islands an d
the hundreds of smaller islands immediatel y
adjacent to Hokkaido, Honshu, Shikoku, and
Kyushu, which formed Japan .
31
32 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Kyushu and Formosa, and numerous
operating bases for aircraft of all types
as well. (See Map 1 . )
From the Allied point of view, th e
conquest of Okinawa would be most
lucrative. As the largest island in the
Ryukyus, it offered excellent locations
for military and naval facilities. There
was sufficient land area on the island on
which to train and stage assault troop s
for subsequent operations against the
heart of the Empire. Kyushu was only
350 nautical miles away, Formosa 33 0
miles distant, and Shanghai, 450. Two
other major purposes of the impendin g
invasion were to secure and develop airbase sites from which Allied aircraft
could operate to gain air superiority
over Japan. It was expected that b y
taking Okinawa, while at the same time
subjecting the Home Islands to blockad e
and bombardment, Japanese militar y
forces and their will to resist would be
severely weakened.
OKINAWA : HISTORY, LAND,
AND PEOPLE 4
Before Commodore Matthew C .
Perry, USN, visited Okinawa in 1853-
54, few Americans had ever heard of
the island. This state of ignorance did
not change much in nearly a century,
but American preinvasion studies in
' Unless otherwise noted, the material in this
section is derived from : JICPOA Bul 63-44,
Nansei Shoto, dtd 15May44 ; CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 161-44, Okinawa Gunto, dtd 15Nov44 ;
EngrSec, FMFPac, Engrintellnfo, Okinawa
Gunto, n.d. The terrain description presented
in this section is that of Okinawa as it existed
at the time of the American invasion an d
before engineer and Seabee units performe d
their earth-transforming feats.
1944 soon shed some light on this allbut-unknown area.
The course of Okinawa history—
from the Chinese invasions about 60 0
A. D. until Japanese annexation in 1879
—was dominated by an amalgamation o f
Chinese and Japanese cultural and
political determinants. For many years,
the Chinese influence reigned supreme .
After the first Chinese-Okinawan contacts had been made, they warre d
against each other until the islan d
peoples were subdued. Shortly after
1368, when the Ming Dynasty came t o
power, China demanded payment of
tribute from Satsudo, the King of Okinawa. The payment was given along
with his pledge of fealty as a Chines e
subject.
In the midst of incessant Okinawa n
dynastic squabbles, Chinese control remained loose and intermittent until
1609, when the Japanese overran the
island, devastating all that stood i n
their way. The king of Okinawa then
reigning was taken prisoner, and a
Japanese local government was established temporarily.
For the next 250 years, the Okinawa n
Kingdom, as such, was in the unenviabl e
position of having to acknowledge both
Chinese and Japanese suzerainty at the
same time. Finally, in May 1875, Japan
forbade the islanders to send any more
tribute to China, whose right to invest
the Okinawan kings was now ended . In
the face of mounting Okinawan protests against this arbitrary action,
Japan followed its decree by dethronin g
the king in March 1879 ; he was reduced
in rank, becoming a marquis of Japan .
Okinawa and its neighboring islands
were then incorporated within the

34 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Japanese political structure as th e
Okinawan Prefecture. Over the years,
China remained restive at this obvious
encroachment, until the question was
one of many settled in Japan's favor b y
its victory in the Sino-Japanese War of
1894.
The islands to which the Japanes e
successfully gained title, the Ryukyu
Retto, were in the southernmost of tw o
groups which make up the Nansei Shoto .
The shoto is a chain of islands which
stretch in a 790-mile-long arc betwee n
Kyushu and Formosa, separating th e
Pacific Ocean from the East China Sea.
One of the groups which make up the
Ryukyu Retto is the Okinawa Gunto . 5
The other four major island groups in
the retto are Osumi, Tokara, Amami ,
and Sakishima. Okinawa Gunto is
located at the half-way point in the ar c
and consists of Okinawa and numerou s
smaller islands. These include Kumi
Shima, Aguni Shima, Ie Shima, and th e
Kerama Retto in the west ; Iheya Retto
and Yoron Shima in the north ; and a
group of small islands, named the
Eastern Islands by the Americans,
roughly paralleling the east central
coast of Okinawa .
The island of Okinawa is narrow and
irregularly shaped throughout its 60 -
mile length. (See Map 2.) In the north,
the Motobu Peninsula juts out into th e
East China Sea and extends the islan d
to its maximum breadth, 18 miles; immediately to the south is the narrowest
part, the two-mile-wide Ishikawa Isthmus. The coastline of the island ranges
Gunto, retto, shoto all are Japanese geographic terms for group or chain of islands ;
jima or shima is translated as island.
in nature from a precipitous and rocky
shore in the north, through a generally
reef-bound lowland belt just below th e
isthmus, to an area of sea cliffs and
raised beaches in the south . Landing
beaches suitable for large-scale amphibious operations were neither numerous nor good. The most extensive fla t
areas and largest beaches on the east
coast were found along the shores o f
Nakagusuku Wan (or bay) and, on th e
west coast, in the area between Zampa
Misaki (or point) and Oroku Peninsula .
Two major fleet anchorages existed,
both on the eastern side of the island :
Nakagusuku Wan (later named Buckner
Bay by the Americans in honor of the
Tenth Army Commander) and Chimu
Wan. The leading port of the Okinawa
Gunto was on the west coast at Naha,
the major city of the island group . Port
facilities elsewhere were limited to
small vessels.
Okinawa is easily divisible into three
geographical parts, each one physically
different from the other. The territory
north of the Ishikawa Isthmus, constituting about two-thirds of the island
area, is largely mountainous, heavily
wooded, and rimmed with dissecte d
terraces—or one-time flatlands whic h
became deeply ravined by the ravages
of erosion . About 80 percent of the
north is covered with a dense growth o f
live oak and conifers, climbing vines,
and brush. The highlands, rising to
rugged peaks, 1,000 to 1,500 feet i n
height, dominate the area . Small, swift
streams drain the clay or sandy-loam
topsoil of the interior which is trafficable under most conditions. Crosscountry movement is limited mainly b y
the steepness of the hills and the lush
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 35
IE SHIMA
if
ANAV
ZAMPA
MISAKI
OKINAWA SHIM A
SNOWING PRINCIPAL GOADS. TOWNS. AND VILLAGES
SCAL E
NILES
MAP 2
310-224 0 - 69 - 4
T. L . RUSSELL
36 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
vegetation. The few roads that existed
in 1945 were mostly along the coast.
The middle division, consisting of
that area lying between Ishikawa
Isthmus and an east-west valley running between the cities of Naha and
Yonabaru, is broadest in its northernmost part. Just south of the isthmus i s
an area resembling northern Okinawa ,
but the rest of the sector is, for the mos t
part, rolling, lightly wooded country
interrupted by steep cliffs and ravines.
The few streams, flowing through hill s
which rarely exceeded a height of 500
feet, are generally narrow and shallow ,
so they could be easily bridged or
forded.
The southernmost tip of the island ,
triangular in shape, is extremely hill y
and was dominated by extensive limestone plateaus, some reaching over 500
feet in height. At each angle of the bas e
of the triangle is a peninsula, Orok u
on the west, and Chinen on the east.
The primary roads built by the Japanese were little more than coral- o r
limestone-surfaced trails, varying in
width from 12 to 16 feet, on a sand
and clay base . Use of these roads depended largely upon the weather, since
rain reduced them to sticky and slowdrying morasses. In the dry season,
the slightest movement on the road s
threw up dense clouds of dust. The
major arteries threaded along the coastlines, branching off into a few crossisland roads which then broke down
into a capillary system of trails connecting the small villages, settlements,
and individual farms. The central sector, the densely populated part of th e
island, contains an intricate network o f
roads. Only one, the broad stone-paved
highway connecting the cities of Shuri
and Naha, could support two lanes o f
traffic . In this area, the road net wa s
augmented by a narrow gauge railway ,
with approximately 30 miles of track .
This system provided the major transisland communications net, running
from Naha to Yonabaru on the east
coast, via the towns of Kobakura and
Kokuba, while trunk lines linked Kobakura and Kokuba with the west coast
towns of Kadena and Itoman, respectively.
Okinawa's climate is tropical, with
moderate winters, hot summers, and
high humidity throughout the year. The
annual temperature range is from a
minimum of 40 degrees to a mean maxi -
mum of 95 degrees in July. The months
of May through September are marke d
by a heavy and erratic rainfall . During
the typhoon season (July-November) ,
torrential rains and winds of over 75
miles-per-hour have been recorded . 6
During the rest of the year, except fo r
brief downpours, good climatic conditions generally prevail.
The inhabitants of Okinawa in 1945
were heirs to a complex racial mixture .
The original population is believed to
have been a branch of the hairy Ain u
and Kumaso stock which formerly inhabited Kyushu and other Japanes e
islands. A Mongoloid strain was introduced when Japanese pirates, who made
Okinawa their headquarters, engaged in
their time-honored habit of kidnappin g
women from the Chinese mainland .
° A typhoon in late September 1945 recorded
winds of up to 120 miles per hour. LtGen
Edward W. Snedeker ltr to Hd, HistBr, G—3
Div, HQMC, dtd 150ct65, hereafter Snedeker
ltr 1965.
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 37
Malayan blood was infused into this
melting pot through intermarriage, immigration, and invasion. This evolutio n
produced a people with the same basi c
characteristics as those of the Japanese ,
but with slight physical differences .
The Okinawans are shorter, darker, an d
are inclined to have more body hair .
The 1940 census gave an estimate of
slightly over 800,000 people in the
Nansei Shoto as a whole, with nearly a
half-million of these on Okinawa proper .
Farmers constituted the largest singl e
population class, with fishermen forming a smaller, but important, group .
Approximately 15 percent of the Okinawa populace lived in Naha, and
within this community were most of
the higher officials, businessmen, and
white collar workers—most of them
Japanese who either had emigrated or
been assigned from the Home Islands.
During the period of the Okinawan
monarchy, there was an elaborate
social hierarchy dominated by nobles
and court officials. After Japanese
annexation, the major social distinctions became those that existed between
governing officials and natives, betwee n
urban and rural inhabitants, and between the rich and the poor—with th e
latter in the majority . Assimilation of
the Japanese and Okinawan societies
was minimal, a situation that was
further irritated by the preferential
treatment tendered by the Japanese t o
their fellow-countrymen when the more
important administrative and political
posts were assigned .
Another chasm separating the Japanese and Okinawan was the differenc e
in languages. Despite a common archai c
tongue which had branched into the
language families of both Okinawa an d
Japan, there were at least five Ryukyuan
dialects which rendered the two languages mutually unintelligible. The
Japanese attempted to reduce the language barrier somewhat by directin g
that standard (Tokyo) Japanese was to
be part of the Okinawan school curriculum. Several decades of formal education, however, failed to remove th e
influence of many generations of Chines e
ethnic features which shaped the Okinawan national characteristics. The
Chinese imprint on the island was such
that one Japanese soldier noted that
"the houses and customs here resemble
those of China, and remind one of a
Chinese town." ' The natives retained
their own culture, religion, and form of
ancestor worship . One outward manifestation of these cultural considerations were the thousands of horseshoeshaped burial vaults, many of impressive size and peculiar beauty, which
were set into the sides of numerou s
cliffs and hills throughout the island .
The basic Okinawan farm settlemen t
consisted of a group of farmsteads, eac h
having the main and other buildings
situated on a small plot of land. The
farmhouses were small, thatch-roofed,
and set off from the invariably winding
trailside by either clay or reed walls.
The agricultural communities generall y
clustered around their own individual
marketplaces . Towns, such as Nago an d
Itoman, were outgrowths of the villages, differing only in the fact that
these larger settlements had several
modern business and government struc-
'Diary of a Superior Private, 272d IIB, "
in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 147-45, Translation s
and Interrogations No. 32, dtd 16Jun45, p . 48.
38 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
tures. The island's cities, Naha and
Shuri, were conspicuous by their many
large stone and concrete public structures and the bustle that accompanie s
an urban setting . Shuri was the ancien t
capital of the Ryukyuan kingdom and its
citadel stood on a high hill in the midst
of a natural fortress area of the island.
The fundamentally agrarian Okinawan economy was dependent upo n
three staple crops. About four-fifths of
southern Okinawa was arable, and half
of the land here was used for the cultivation of sweet potatoes, the predominant foodstuff of both men and animals.
Sugar cane was the principal commercial crop and its cultivation utilized the
second largest number of acres. Some
rice was also grown, but this crop consistently produced a yield far below
local requirements. Since rice production was sufficient to satisfy only two -
thirds of the population's annual consumption needs., more than 10 million
bushels had to be imported annually
from Formosa . 8
Industrial development on the islan d
was rudimentary. The Naha-Shuri area
was the leading manufacturing center
where such items as alcoholic beverages,
lacquerware, and silk pongee were produced. Manufacturing was carried out
chiefly in small factories or by workers
in their homes. The only relatively important industry carried on outside of
the Naha-Shuri complex was sugar refining, in which cattle supplied th e
power in very primitive mills. The fishe MilHistSec, Japanese Research Div, HQUSAFFE, Japanese Monograph No . 135,
Okinawa Operations Record, revised edition
dtd Nov49, p . 60, hereafter Okinawa Operations
Record.
ing trade, of some importance, centered
around Naha and Itoman . There wer e
also small numbers of fishing craft
based at all of the other usable harbors
on the island ; however, lack of refrigeration, distance to the fishing grounds,
and seasonal typhoons all hindered th e
development of this industry and prevented its becoming a large source of
income for the Okinawans.
From the very beginnings of the 1879
annexation, the Japanese government
made intensive efforts to bring the
Ryukyuan people under complete domination through the means of a closel y
controlled educational system, militar y
conscription, and a carefully supervise d
system of local government . The prefectural governor was answerabl e
only to the Home Minister in Tokyo .
Although the elected prefectural assembly acted as the gubernatorial advisory
body, the governor accepted, rejected ,
or ignored their suggestions as he saw
fit. On a local level, assemblies elected
in the cities, towns, and townships i n
turn elected a mayor. All local administrative units were, in effect, directly
under the governor's control, and their
acts or very existence were subject to
his pleasure.
In every aspect—social, political., and
economic—the Okinawan was kept in a
position inferior to that of any othe r
Japanese citizen residing either on Okinawa or elsewhere in the Empire . This
did not prevent the government fro m
imposing on the Okinawan a period o f
obligated military service .° The periodic
° Military conscription was first enforced on
Okinawa in 1898, although in Japan proper ,
conscription had been in effect since 1873 . Wa r
History Office Comments.
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 39
call-ups of age groups was enforce d
equally upon the natives of Okinawa
and the Ryukyus as on the male inhabitants of Japan proper. This provide d
Japan with a reservoir of trained reservists from which it could draw when -
ever necessary.
With the exception of those drafts of
reservists leaving for active duty else -
where, Okinawa, for all practical purposes, was in the backwash of the early
stages of World War II. The island remained in this state until April 1944 ,
when Japan activated the Thirty-second
Army, set up its headquarters on Okinawa, and assigned it responsibility
for the defense of the island chain .
THE JAPANESE FORCES "
Following the massive and devastating United States naval air and surface
bombardment of Truk, 17–18 February
1944, and the breaching of the Marianas
line shortly thereafter, the Japanes e
Imperial General Headquarters awakened to the obviously weak condition of
the Ryukyus' defenses. Prior to 1944,
little attention had been paid to the
arming of the Nansei Shoto. The island
group boasted two minor naval bases
only, one at Amami 0-Shima and th e
10 Unless otherwise noted, the material in this
section is derived from : Tenth Army IntelMono, dtd Aug45, pt I, secs A and B, hereafter
IntelMono ; Tenth Army G–3 POW Interrogation Summaries Nos. 1–19, Jul-Aug45, here -
after POW InterSum; Tenth Army G–2 Interrogation Rpt No. 27, Akira Shimada, dt d
24Ju145, hereafter Shimada Interrogation;
Tenth Army Interrogation Rpt No . 28, Col
Hiromichi Yahara (Senior Staff Officer,
Thirty-second Army), dtd 6Aug45, hereafter
Yahara Interrogation ; Hayashi and Coox,
Kogun ; Okinawa Operations Record.
other at Naha, and a few small Arm y
garrisons such as the Nakagusuku Wa n
Fortress Artillery Unit on Okinawa.
"
Acting with an alacrity born of distinct necessity, IGHQ took steps to correct this weakness in the Empire's inne r
defensive positions by expediting and
intensifying :
. . . operational preparations in the area
extending from Formosa to the Nanse i
Islands with the view of defending ou r
territory in the Nansei area and securin g
our lines of communication with our
southern sector of operations, and thereby
build a structure capable first, of resisting the enemy's surprise attacks' and ,
second, of crushing their attempts to seiz e
the area when conditions [change] in our
favor. 1 2
In order to improve Japanese defenses in the Ryukyus, IGHQ assigned
this mission on 22 March 1944, to th e
Thirty-second Army, the command of
which was assumed formally on 1 April
by Lieutenant General Masao Watanabe. At Naha, headquarters of the
new army, staff officers hoped that
enough time would be available for adequate fortification of the island . All
planning was tempered by memories o f
the immediate past which indicated that
"an army trained to attack on any an d
every occasion, irrespective of conditions, and with no calculation as to the
real chances of success, could be beaten
soundly." 18 Added stimuli to Japanes e
11 Actually, there were three garrisons located in Nansei Shoto : one on Amami 0-Shim a
founded in 1922 ; and two founded in August
1941—Funauki Fortress at Nishi Omote-Jima
and the Nakagusuku Wan Fortress noted
above . War History Office Comments.
12 Okinawa Operations Record, p . 1 .
"IntelMono, pt I, sec A, p . 3.
40 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
preparations were the American invasions of Peleliu and Morotai on 1 5
September 1944 . By this time, the Japanese high command became quite certain that either Formosa, the Ryukyus,
or the Bonins, or all three, were to be
invaded by the spring of 1945 at the
latest. Initially, Japanese Army and
Navy air forces were to blunt the
assaults in a major air counteroffensive.
The establishment of Allied air superiority and demonstrated weaknesses o f
Japanese air forces, however, caused
the military leaders in Tokyo to downgrade the aviation role in the comin g
struggle for the defense of the Home
Islands. The ground forces, then, would
carry the major burden .
The Thirty-second Army staff planners wasted no time in organizing the
ground defenses of Okinawa . They had
learned by the cruel experiences of Japanese forces on islands which had been
invaded by the Americans that a stan d
at the shoreline would only result i n
complete annihilation and that their
beach positions would be torn to pieces
in a naval bombardment. It became
apparent, therefore, that the primar y
defensive positions had to be set up inland. Then, should the invaders escap e
destruction at sea under the guns an d
torpedoes of Japanese naval forces, or
at the beachhead under the downpou r
of artillery shells, the death blow woul d
be administered by the ground forces'
assumption "of the offensive in du e
course." 14 To steel the troops' determination to fight and to keep their moral e
at a high peak, army headquarters devised the following battle slogans:
14 Hayashi and Coox, Kogun, p. 116.
One Plane for One Warship
One Boat for One Shi p
One Man for Ten of the Enemy
or One Tank. 1 5
The command of the Thirty-second
Army was assumed by Lieutenant General Mitsuru Ushijima in August 1944,
when General Watanabe was forced to
retire because of a continuing illness.
Because of the importance of the impending Okinawa battle, IGHQ assigned
General Ushijima one of the most competent officers of the Japanese Army,
Major General Isamu Cho, as his chie f
of staff. On 21 January, army headquarters was split into two groups.
Ushijima's operations staff moved t o
Shuri where the general was to direc t
his army for the major portion of th e
campaign. A "rear headquarters" composed of the ordnance, veterinary,
judicial, intendance, 16 and the greate r
part of the medical staff set up near
Tsukasan, south of Shuri.
Lieutenant Generals Ushijima an d
Cho 17 complemented each other's military qualities and personality, and
formed a command team that reflected
mutual trust and respect. They were
ably abetted by the only holdover from
15 "Thirty-second Army Battle Instructions,
dtd 15Feb45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 122–
45, Translations and Interrogations No . 30, dtd
1Jun45 .
18 The intendance service, which had no exac t
U. S. military equivalent, controlled clothing,
rations, forage, pay, and the upkeep of Army
buildings. In effect, it combined the functions
of the U. S. Army Quartermaster Corps and
Finance Department . WD, Handbook o n
Japanese Military Forces, TM–30–480 (Washington, 10ct44), p. 50.
1' On 1Mar45, at the age of 51, Cho was
promoted to lieutenant general .
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 41
the old staff, Colonel Hiromichi Yahara,
who retained his billet as Senior Office r
in Charge of Operations,' 8 and Major
Tadao Miyake as the logistics oflicer . 1 °
Ushijima, a senior officer slated for promotion to general in August 1945, was
reputedly a man of great integrity an d
character who demonstrated a quie t
competence which, in turn, inspire d
great confidence, loyalty, and respec t
from his subordinates. Cho, in comparison, was a fiery, ebullient, and harddriving individual with a brilliant, inquiring mind. He spared neither himself nor his staff. His abounding energ y
was effectively counterbalanced by his
senior's calm outward appearance . This
combination of personalities was served
by comparatively young and alert staff
members who were allowed a grea t
latitude of action and independence of
thought.
The new commander of the Thirtysecond Army inherited a combat organization which had been specially established for the expected invasion of Okinawa. Many independent artillery,
mortar, antiaircraft artillery (AAA) ,
antitank (AT), and machine gu n
groups supplemented the fire power of
the basic infantry units assigned to the
army. As a result of the IGHQ decision
in June 1944 to reinforce the Okinawa
garrison, nine infantry and three artillery battalions were to be sent to augis Colonel Yahara's professional background
included a preponderence of staff assignments .
He had been a military attache in the United
States and Thailand, returning to the latter
country as a participant in the Burma campaign. MIS, HistDiv, GHQ, FEC, Personal
History Statements, n.d ., p . 56.
10 War History Office Comments.
ment the force already on the island . 2 °
The majority of the reinforcements
arrived from their previous stations i n
China, Manchuria, and Japan between
June and August 1944 .
The veteran 9th Infantry Division ,
first to arrive, possessed battle honors
dating from the Russo-Japanese War
of 1904-5. Coming directly from Manchuria, and scheduled by the high command as the backbone of the defense
force, the 9th's stay on Okinawa was
short-lived . The critical situation on
Leyte required the assignment of the
9th there, and Ushijima, " . . . in accordance with orders of Imperial General
Headquarters, decided on 17 November
to redeploy the 9th Division in order to
send an elite unit with a proud and glorious war record to a battlefield where
the Imperial Army would engage in a
decisive battle." 2 1
Probably, the most important of all
of the factors which may have influenced
the course of the coming battle for the
Japanese, and favored an Allied victory, was the loss of this division and
the fact that it was never replaced. It
left in late December for the Philippine s
by way of Formosa where it sat out th e
rest of the war, prevented by Allied
submarines and airplanes—and Mac -
Arthur's landing on Luzon in Januar y
—from either continuing on to its destination or returning to Okinawa . 2 2
20 "Empire Defense Operations Plan, dt d
15Jun44," in CinCPac—CinCPOA Bul 194—45 ,
Special Translation No . 86, dtd 7Aug45, pp.
5—6 .
21 Okinawa Operations Record, p. 33 .
22 MIS, WD, Order of Battle for the Japanes e
Armed Forces, dtd 1Mar45, p . 32 .
42 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
THIRTY-SECOND ARMY OFFICERS sit for a formal portrait in February 1945.
Numbers identify : (1) Rear Admiral Minoru Ota, Commander, Naval Base Force ;
(2) Lieutenant General Mitsuru Ushijima, Commanding General, Thirty-second Army ;
(3) Lieutenant General Isamu Cho, Army CIS ; (4) Colonel Hiromichi Yahara, Army
Senior Staff Officer. (Photograph courtesy of OCMH, DA)
NORTH BANK of the Bishi Gawa shows the typical integrated tomb-cave-dugout
defenses which characterized Japanese organization of Okinawan terrain . (USA
SC183743)
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 43
Since the 9th Infantry Division was
no longer available to the Thirty-second
Army, and in order to carry out his defensive plans, Ushijima asked for replacements. He was notified by IGHQ
on 23 January 1945 that the 84th Division in Himeji would be sent to Okinawa. This notification was cancelle d
that same day with the explanation that
the greatest possible supply of munitions would be sent, but replacement s
neither could nor would be sent to th e
army. 23 This, in effect, put Ushijima on
notice that the means to improve hi s
situation had to be found locally .
In June 1944, the Thirty-second Army
was to have been reinforced by Majo r
General Shigeji Suzuki's 44th Independent Mixed Brigade (IMB), a unit
of approximately 6,000 men organize d
that very month on Kyushu . It was
originally composed of the 1st and 2d
Infantry Units (each essentially of regimental size) and attached artillery,
engineer, and signal units. While en
route to Okinawa, the Toyama Maru,
the ship carrying the brigade, wa s
torpedoed by an American submarine
off Amami 0-Shima on 29 June . More
than 5,000 men were lost and only
about 600 survivors of the ill-fate d
brigade landed on Okinawa ; these were
used as the nucleus of a reconstitute d
2d Infantry Unit. Other replacements
were obtained from Kyushu as well as
from the ranks of conscripted Okinawans, but the reorganized unit was
never fully re-equipped . As a result, this
lack of basic infantry equipment caused
the 2d Infantry Unit to be known among
other soldiers on the island as the Bimb o
23 Okinawa Operations Record, pp. 44-45.
Tai or "have-nothing-unit." 24 The 1st
Infantry Unit was never rebuilt and
existed merely as a headquarters organization. Instead, the 15th Independent
Mixed Regiment (IMR), a unit newly
raised in Narashino, Chiba-ken, was
flown directly to Okinawa during the
period 6–11 July and added to the 44th
IMB in September, bringing its strength
up to about 5,000 men .
The next unit of importance to arrive
was the 24th Infantry Division which
landed in August. Since its initial organization as part of the Kwantung Army
in October 1939, the 24th had been responsible for the security of the easter n
boundaries of Manchuria . The division,
commanded by Lieutenant General
Tatsumi Amamiya, was well-equippe d
and well-trained, but not battle-proven ,
before it joined the Thirty-second Army .
The 24th was a triangular division
which had been stripped of its infantry
group headquarters, one battalion from
each infantry regiment, an artillery
battalion, and an engineer company, all
of which had been added to expeditionary units sent from Manchuria to th e
Central Pacific in early 1944. Until a
general Thirty-second Army reorganization in February 1945, the 24th's infantry regiments (22d, 32d, and 89th
Infantry) functioned with only two
battalions each. The division set up its
headquarters at Kadena, and in October,
it assigned 300 Okinawan conscripts,
received from the Thirty-second Army,
to each of its infantry regiments for
training and retention later by th e
training unit. The February reorganization brought the 24th nearly up to its
24 IntelMono, pt I, sec B, chap 3, p . 9.
44 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
original strength and made it the largest
tactical unit in the Thirty-second Army ,
with more than 14,000 Japanese troops
and Okinawan draftees assigned to infantry, artillery., reconnaissance, engineer, and transport regiments, and divisional troops.
The final major unit assigned to General Ushijima's command was the 62d
Infantry Division, commanded by Lieutenant General Takeo Fujioka . This was
a brigaded organization which had see n
action in China following its activatio n
there in June 1943. Its table of organization, considerably different from th e
24th Division's, was similar to that of
like units in the Chinese Expeditionary
Army. Both of the 62d's brigades had
served as independent commands in
China since 1938, while the division a s
a whole fought in the April–June 1944
campaigns in northern Honan Province.
Each brigade had four independent infantry battalions (IIBs) ; the 63d Brigade had the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th
IIBs, while the 15th, 21st, 22d, and 23d
IIBs were assigned to the 64th Brigade .
In 1944, two additional IIBs were sent t o
Okinawa as reinforcements and attache d
on 15 December to the division which ,
in turn, assigned them to the brigades .
The 272d IIB went to the 64th Brigade ,
while the 273 JIB went to the 63d.
The 62d Division lacked organic artillery and had few other supporting arms.
It never attained a strength greate r
than 12,000 troops, the largest proportion of whom were infantrymen. The
infantry battalions of the 62d were the
strongest units of their type on Okinawa, as each battalion mustered a total
of 1,200 men organized into five rifle
companies, a machine gun company,
and an infantry gun company armed
with two 75mm guns and two 70mm
howitzers. The 272d and 273d IIBs were
reported later as having a strength of
700 men each, but with one or two les s
rifle companies per battalion .
Some variance in strength was foun d
in the infantry components of the othe r
two major fighting organizations of th e
Thirty-second Army. The 2d Infantry
Unit and 15th IMR of the 44th IMB had
in common three rifle battalions, a n
antitank company (four 37mm or 47m m
AT guns), and a regimental gun company (four 75mm guns) . Each of the
battalions listed a total strength of 70 0
men who were assigned to three rifl e
companies, a machine gun company,
and an infantry gun unit (two 70mm
howitzers) . The 24th Division regimental organization was similar except
for the replacement, in one battalion of
each regiment, of the 70mm howitzers
by a mortar platoon manning fou r
81mm mortars.
Since the Japanese high command
envisioned the coming battle for Okinawa as developing into one of fixe d
position defense, the defenders wer e
not assigned any appreciably strong
armored force. The entire Japanese
tank strength, given to the Thirty-second Army in July, consisted of the 27th
Tank Regiment, organized originally in
Manchuria in April 1944, from elements
of the 2d Armored Division. It was a
regiment in name only, as one of its
medium tank companies was sent to th e
garrison at Miyako Jima. What remained was an armored task force with
a strength of 750 men who filled th e
ranks of one light and one medium tan k
company, a tractor-drawn artillery bat-
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 45
tery, an infantry company, a maintenance company, and an engineer platoon. The regiment's heavy weapon s
included 14 medium and 13 light tanks,
4 75mm guns, 2 47mm AT guns, and 1 0
machine guns. The heaviest tankmounted weapon was the 57mm gun on
the medium tanks.
As the Japanese position in the
Philippines became hopeless, shipments
of weapons to be sent there wer e
diverted by IGHQ to Okinawa. The result was that the Thirty-second Army
possessed a heavier concentration o f
artillery power, grouped under a singl e
command, than had been available t o
any Japanese force in previous Pacifi c
campaigns. The total artillery strength
on Okinawa, with the exception of th e
24th Division's organic 42d Field Artillery Regiment, was grouped within
Major General Kosuke Wada's 5th
Artillery Command. Besides the comparatively weak 7th Heavy Artillery
Regiment (formerly the Nakagusuku
Wan Fortress Artillery Unit), General
Wada's command included two medium
regiments, a heavy battalion, and th e
artillery units of the 44th IMB and 27th
Tank Regiment. Combat-tested at
Bataan in the Philippines, the 1st
Medium Artillery Regiment had one of
its two battalions assigned to Miyako
Jima upon arrival from Manchuria in
July. The other medium regiment was
the 23d which, until its departure for
Okinawa in October, had been stationed
in eastern Manchuria from the time o f
its activation in 1942 . The two medium
artillery regiments together mustered
a total of 2,000 troops who manned 36
150mm howitzers. The artillery command also contained the 100th Inde -
pendent Heavy Artillery Battalion . This
unit was formed in June of 1944 i n
Yokosuka and sent to Okinawa in July
with 500 men and 8 150mm guns.
Besides artillery units, General
Wada's troop list included a mortar
regiment and two light mortar battalions. The 1st Independent Heavy
Mortar Regiment's 320mm spigot mortars were an unusual type of weapons
which Marines had first encountered on
Iwo Jima. 25 These awesome weapons,
firing a 675-pound shell dubbed a "flying ashcan" by Americans, were th e
basic armament of this unit. Only half
of its six batteries were on Okinawa ,
as the other three had been sent to
Burma in mid-1942. Although the 96
81mm mortars of the 1st and 2d Light
Mortar Battalions were nominally under
the command of General Wada, actually
they were assigned in close support o f
the various infantry units and usuall y
operated under the direction of their
respective sector defense commanders .
The infantry was strengthened wit h
other types of artillery weapons from
antiaircraft artillery, antitank, and
automatic weapons units which wer e
attached to them during most of th e
campaign . A dual air-ground defense
role was performed by the 72 75mm
guns and 54 20mm machine cannon i n
4 independent antiaircraft artillery, 3
field antiaircraft artillery, and 3 machine-cannon battalions. In addition, 48
lethal, high-velocity, flat trajectory
47mm guns (located in 3 independent
antitank battalions and 2 independen t
26 LtCol Whitman S. Bartley, Iwo Jima :
Amphibious Epic (Washington : HistBr, G–3
Div, HQMC, 1954), pp. 13–14, hereafter Bart -
ley, Iwo Jima.
46 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
companies) were added to the defense .
Completing the infantry fire support of
the Thirty-second Army were 4 independent machine gun battalions whic h
had a total of 96 heavy machine guns.
The rest of General Ushijima's army
consisted of many diverse units and
supporting elements. The departure of
the 9th Division created a shortage of
infantry troops which had to be mad e
up in as expeditious a manner as possible. The reserve of potential infantry
replacements on the island varied i n
quality from good, in the two shippin g
engineer regiments, to poor, at best, in
the various rear area service organizations. The 19th Air Sector Command,
whose airfield maintenance and construction troops were stationed at the
Yontan, Kadena, and Ie Shima airstrips ,
provided the largest number of replacements, 7,000 men.
Another source of troops to fill infantry ranks was found in the sea-raiding units. These organizations, first
encountered by American forces in th e
Philippines, were designed for the destruction of amphibious invasion shipping by means of explosive-lade n
suicide boats. There were a total of
seven sea-raiding squadrons in the Okinawa Gunto, three of which were base d
at Kerama Retto. Each of the squadrons
had assigned to it 100 hand-picked
candidates for suicide and martyrdom,
whose caliber was uniformly high since
each man was considered officer material . When one of these men failed t o
return, it was presumed that his had
been a successful mission and, reportedly, he was therefore given a
posthumous promotion to second lieu -
tenant.
Japanese naval base activities on
Okinawa were under the command o f
Rear Admiral Minoru Ota . Admiral Ot a
was commander of the Naval Bas e
Force for the Okinawa area, commander
of the 4th Surface Escort Unit, and also
was in charge of naval aviation activities in the Nansei Islands. Army-Navy
relations and the chain of command o n
Okinawa were based locally on mutua l
agreements between the Thirty-second
Army and the Naval Base Force . 2 6
Admiral Ota directed the activities o f
approximately 10,000 men, of whom
3,500 were Japanese naval personnel
and the other 6,000–7,000 were civilia n
employees belonging to sub-units of th e
Naval Base Force . Of the total number
of uniformed naval troops, only abou t
200 were considered to have received
any kind of infantry training. Upon the
activation of the base force on 15 April
1944, a small number of naval officers
and enlisted men, and most of the civilians, were formed into maintenance ,
supply, and construction units for th e
large airfield on Oroku Peninsula and
the harbor installations at Naha . At
Unten-Ko, on Motobu Peninsula in the
north, were stationed a torpedo boat
squadron and a midget submarine unit.
In organizing for the defense of the
island, the greater portion of regula r
naval troops were formed into antiaircraft artillery and coastal defense bat -
"Okinawa Operations Record, pp. 57–59 ;
for a discussion of the Japanese high comman d
setup, see Henry I. Shaw, Jr. and Maj Dougla s
T. Kane, Isolation of Rabaul—History of U. S.
Marine Corps Operations in World War II, v .
II (Washington : HistBr, G–3 Div, HQMC.
1963), hereafter Shaw and Kane, Isolation of
Rabaul, especially that section in chap I entitled "Japanese Strategy."
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 47
teries. These were broken down into
four battery groups which were emplaced mainly in the Naha-Oroku -
Tomigusuku area. The antiaircraft units
manned 20 120mm guns, 77 machine
cannon, and 60 13mm machine guns,
while the 15 coast defense batteries,
placed in strategic positions on th e
coastline under the control of Army
local sector commanders, stood read y
by their 14cm and 12cm naval guns.
Although the total strength in numbers
was impressive, the Okinawa Naval
Base Force did not have a combat potential commensurate with its size .
Continually seeking means to bolste r
his defenses, General Ushijima receive d
permission to mobilize a home guard on
the island. In July 1944, the Okinawa
Branch of the Imperial Reservists Association formed a home guard, whose
members were called Boeitai. They wer e
organized on a company-sized basis b y
town or village and were mainly comprised of reservists. Since the Boeitai
represented a voluntarily organize d
group, it did not come under the Japanese Military Service Act, althoug h
their training and equipment came
from the regular forces into whose
ranks they were to be integrated when
the battle was joined . The total number
of Boeitai thus absorbed by the Thirtysecond Army has been estimated between 17,000 and 20,000 men.
On Okinawa there were certain units
which have often been confused with
the Boeitai. These were the three Special Guard Companies (223d, 224th, and
225th) and three Special Guard Engineer Units (502d, 503d, and 504th)
which were special components of the
Thirty-second Army. During peacetime,
each unit had a cadre of several commissioned and noncommissioned officers.
When war broke out, certain designate d
reservists reported to the above units t o
which they had been previously assigned. 2 7
Even the youth of the island were not
exempt from the mobilization . About
1,700 male students, 14 years of age an d
older, from Okinawa's middle schools,
were organized into volunteer youth
groups called the Tekketsu (Blood and
Iron for the Emperor Duty Units) .
These young boys were eventually assigned to front-line duties and t o
guerrilla-type functions for which they
had been trained. Most, however, wer e
assigned to communication units.
It has not been conclusively determined how many native Okinawans
were actually added to the forces of th e
Thirty-second Army, or to what extent
they influenced the final course of battle .
What is known, however, is that their
greatest contribution was the labor they
performed which, in a period of nin e
months, transformed the island landscape into hornets' nests of death an d
destruction.
THE JAPANESE DEFENSES 2 8
Continuing American successes in
the conduct of amphibious operation s
forced the Japanese to recognize the
increasing difficulties of defending
against assaults from the sea . The loss
"War History Office Comments.
28 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : IntelMono ; POW
InterSum; Shimada Interrogation ; Yahara
Interrogation; Hayashi and Coox, Kogun.
48 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
of some islands in 1944 reportedly
caused Japanese garrison units at othe r
Imperial bases in the Pacific to lose confidence in themselves and their ability
to withstand an American seaborne invasion. The Japanese high command
hastily published the "Essentials of
Island Defense," a document which
credited Americans with overwhelmin g
naval and air power, and emphasized
that the garrisons should "lay out an d
equip positions which can withstand
heavy naval and aerial bombardment ,
and which are suitable for protracte d
delaying action . . . diminish the fightin g
effectiveness of landing units . . . seize
opportunities to try to annihilate th e
force in one fell swoop ." 2 9
This document may have influence d
General Ushijima's decisions when h e
settled on a final defense plan, although
his particular situation was governed
primarily by the strength of the Thirtysecond Army and the nature of the are a
it was to defend. Captured on Okinawa
were a set of instructions for the defense of Iwo Jima, which were apparently a blueprint also for the defense of
critical areas on the coasts of the
islands of Japan. It is assumed that
Ushijima may have seen these instructions, for they bore directly on his
problem :
In situations where island garrisons
cannot expect reinforcements of troops
from rear echelons, but must carry on the
battle themselves from start to finish, the y
should exhaust every means for securing
a favorable outcome, disrupting the enemy's plans by inflicting maximum losse s
on him, and, even when the situation is
29 Hayashi and Coox, Kogun, pp. 115–116 .
hopeless, holding out in strong position s
for as long as possible . 3 0
In order to deceive the assaulting
forces as to Japanese intentions, a
Thirty-second Army battle instruction
warned the troops to "guard against
opening fire prematurely." 31 A later
battle instruction explained that "the
most effective and certain way of [th e
Americans'] ascertaining the existence
and organization of our firepower system is to have us open fire prematurel y
on a powerful force where it can
maneuver." 3 2
These instructions were a forewarning that, rather than forcing the issue
on the beaches, "the Japanese soldier
would dig and construct in a way and t o
an extent that an American soldier ha s
never been known to do." 33 Japanese
organization of the ground paralleled
that which assault troops had discovered on Biak, Saipan, and Peleliu i n
1944 and Iwo Jima in 1945. 34 General
Cho, a strong advocate of underground
and cave fortifications, took an active
""Land Defense Doctrine (Provisional) ,
dtd 1Dec44," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 147–45,
Translations and Interrogations No. 32, dtd
16Jun45, p . 4.
""Thirty-second Army Battle Instruction s
No . 3, dtd 15Feb45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA
Bul 122–45, Translations and Interrogation s
No. 30, dtd 1Jun45, p. 2.
""Thirty-second Army Battle Instruction
No. 8, dtd 8Mar45," in Ibid., p. 7 .
IntelMono, pt I, sec A, p. 5.
For a discussion of Japanese defenses on
these islands, see Robert R. Smith, The Approach to the Philippines—U. S. Army in
World War II (Washington : OCMH, DA,
1953), pp. 300–302 ; Maj Frank O. Hough, The
Assault on Peleliu (Washington : HistDiv,
HQMC, 1950), pp. 192–197 ; Bartley, Iwo Jima,
pp. 5–18.
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 49
part in designating where defensive
positions were to be placed. The most
favorable terrain for the defense was
occupied and honeycombed with mutually supporting gun positions and protected connecting tunnels. Natural and
man-made barriers were effectively incorporated to channel attackers int o
prepared fire lanes and pre-registere d
impact areas. The reverse as well as the
forward slopes of hills were fortified,
while artillery, mortars, and automati c
weapons were emplaced in cave mouths,
with their employment completely integrated within the final protective fir e
plan.
Each unit commander., from brigade
down to company level, was made responsible for the organization of the
ground and fortification of the sector
assigned to him. The need for heavy
construction was lessened, in some
cases, by the abundance of large cave s
on Okinawa which required but slight
reinforcement to enable them to with -
stand even the heaviest bombardment .
Once improvements were made, these
natural fortresses served either as hospitals, barracks, command posts, or al l
of these combined when the size of the
cave permitted. There were generally
two or more entrances to the caves,
which sometimes had more than one
level if time and manpower was avail -
able for the extensive digging necessary. Tunnels led from the caves to
automatic weapons and light artillery
positions which, in conjunction with the
pillboxes and rifle pits in the area, dominated each defense zone . The approaches
and entryway to each cave were invariably guarded by machine guns and,
in addition, by covering fire from positions outside the cave.
Integrated within the whole Japanese
defensive system, these cave strong -
holds were, in turn, centers of smal l
unit positions. Item Pocket, one of the
most vigorously defended sectors o n
Okinawa, was typical of the ones American forces ran into. (See Map I, Map
Section.) The area encompassed by this
position, roughly 2,500 by 4,500 yards i n
size, was in the vicinity of Machinat o
Airfield. Both the 1st Marine and 27th
Infantry Divisions fought bitterly t o
gain it. Disposed within the caves and
bunkers of the pocket was a reinforced
infantry battalion which manned approximately 16 grenade launchers, 83
light machine guns, 41 heavy machine
guns, 7 47mm antitank guns, 2 81mm
mortars, 2 70mm howitzers, and 6
75mm guns. A minefield and an antitank trench system completed the defenses. This sector was so organize d
that there were no weak points visibl e
to the attacker. Any area not swept by
automatic weapons fire could be reache d
by either artillery or mortars. These defensive positions formed a vital link in
the chain of the tough outer defense s
guarding Shuri.
Based on the dictum that "the islan d
must be divided into sectors according
to the defense plan so that command
will be simplified," 35 each combat element of the Thirty-second Army was
assigned a sector to develop and defen d
as it arrived on Okinawa. By August
1944, the 44th IMB's 2d Infantry Unit
(400 troops) under Colonel Takehiko
""Combat Regulations for Japanese Garrison Units," n.d ., in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul
115-44, dtd 18Aug44.
50 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Udo had occupied its assigned area ,
Kunigami Gun (County), and had assumed responsibility for all of the
island north of the Ishikawa Isthmus,
and also for Ie Shima and its airfields.
Upon its arrival on Okinawa, the
24th Division had begun to construct
field fortifications around Yontan an d
Kadena airfields in an area bounded
by Ishikawa Isthmus in the north an d
a line from Sunabe to Ozato in the
south. Below the 24th's zone of defense,
the 62d Division was unflagging in its
efforts to alter the ridges, ravines, an d
hillsides north of Shuri . Responsibilit y
for the entire southern portion of Okinawa below Shuri had been assumed by
the 9th Division commander.
The receipt of orders in Novembe r
for the transfer of the 9th Division
forced a redeployment of Thirty-second
Army troops and strained a defens e
that was already dangerously weak.
The 24th Division began moving sout h
to take over some 9th Division positions
while the 44th IMB, leaving two reinforced battalions of the 2d Infantry
Unit behind on Ie Shima and Motobu
Peninsula, occupied an area which
reached from Kadena airfield south -
ward to Chatan . The 62d Division positions were likewise affected by the withdrawal of the 9th's 14,000 combat
troops, as the northern divisional
boundary of the 62d dropped to the
Chatan-Futema line . In the south, the
62d zone of responsibility was increase d
tremendously to include all of Naha ,
Shuri, Yonabaru, and the entire Chinen
Peninsula .
Although the construction of fortifications, underground positions, and
cave sites had been going on since the
spring of 1944, the urgency of the wa r
situation and the expectance of an imminent invasion compelled the defender s
to reevaluate their plans of deploymen t
for blunting the assault. The exact dat e
of the new Thirty-second Army plan is
not known, but a reasonable assumptio n
is that the loss of the 9th Division in
November which triggered the shuffling
of units also forced a decision on a fina l
defense plan. At the end of the month,
General Ushijima and his staff pondered
the following alternatives before settling on the one which they believed
would guarantee the success of their
mission :
Plan I : To defend, from extensive underground positions, the Shimajiri sector, th e
main zone of defenses being north of Naha ,
Shuri, and Yonabaru . Landings north of
these defenses were not to be opposed ;
landings south of the line would be me t
at the beaches. Since it was impossible to
defend Kadena airfield [with available
troops], 15cm guns were to be emplace d
so as to bring fire on the airfield and den y
the invaders its use .
Plan II : To defend from prepared positions the central portion of the island ,
including the Kadena and Yontan airfields .
Plan III : To dispose one division aroun d
the Kadena area, one division in the south -
ern end of the island, and one brigade
between the two divisions. To meet the
enemy wherever he lands and attempt t o
annihilate him on the beaches.
Plan IV : To defend the northern part
of the island, with Army Headquarters a t
Nago, and the main line of defense base d
on Hill 220, northeast of Yontan airfield . 3 6
Realistically appraising the many
factors which might effect each one of
the alternate plans, the Japanese settle d
on Plan I. Plan III was abandone d
simply because the Thirty-second Army
38 IntelMono, pt I sec A, pp . 1-2.
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 51
did not have the strength adequate t o
realize all that the plan encompassed .
Plan IV was rejected because it conceded the loss of the militarily important south even before the battle ha d
been joined. Plan II, the one whic h
American staff planners feared as offering the greatest threat to a successfu l
invasion, was regretfully relinquishe d
by the Japanese. Ushijima, recognizing
his troops' capabilities and limitations,
realized that his forces, in the main, ha d
not been trained to fight this type of
delaying action which would prolon g
the battle, bloody the invaders, and permit the bulk of his army to withdraw
to the more heavily fortified souther n
portion of Okinawa. Yet, in effect, this
is exactly the strategy he was forced t o
employ after the initial American landings.
Placing Plan I into effect, the Japanese centered the main battle positio n
in the Shuri area, where the rugged
terrain surrounding the ancient capita l
was developed with the strongest installations oriented north toward the
Hagushi beaches. (See Map 3.) The
Hagushi region, coincidentally, evolve d
as a secondary target to the Japanese
and a primary target to American staff
planners. In addition, "handicapped b y
their lack of ability to make a logistics
estimate for a landing operation," 37 the
Japanese believed that the major effort
would be made in the southeast with an
assault across the Minatogawa beaches.
Overlooking both the Minatogawa an d
Nakagusuku Wan beaches, Chine n
Peninsula heights presented the de -
fenders with the most favorable ter37 Ibid., p . 3 .
310-224 0 - 69 - 5
rain of its type on Okinawa and, as
such, it was hoped that the invaders
could be met and defeated here. Since,
from the standpoint of actual manpower, the Chinen sector was the weakest area in the final defense plan, a
goodly portion of the artillery and infantry strength of the Thirty-secon d
Army—which could have been bette r
employed in reinforcing Shuri position s
—was diverted to the peninsula, remaining there out of action during th e
first weeks of the campaign. 3 S
Among Ushijima 's most pressing
needs were additional troops and time
in which to train them. Extra time was
needed also to provide for expandin g
and strengthening existing fortifications as well as the communications net .
With the exception of a drastic fuel
shortage, the army was in good logistical shape. Although the Thirty-second
Army itself had no provisions in reserve, enough had been distributed to
subordinate units, and stored by them
in caves near troop dispositions, to last
until September 1945. This system was
satisfactory in that the strain on th e
overworked transportation facilities was
removed, but when an area was overru n
by Americans and the Japanese were
aB In the Thirty-second Army staff there was
sharp disagreement as to the probability of thi s
additional landing . Colonel Yahara, senior staff
officer, insisted that a diversionary landing ,
possibly the principle one, would be made in
the Minatoga region . Major Yakamaru, the intelligence officer, held that the only America n
landing would be in the Hagushi area . Prestige
and seniority won the argument . `Yakamaru ,
bitterly disappointed at the final decision, went
off the next few days to inundate his sorrows
in prolonged draughts of expensive sake . '
Shimada Interrogation .

THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 53
forced to withdraw, the supplies were
lost.
Unable to halt the inexorable press
of time, General Ushijima now found i t
imperative to beef-up his infantry component from sources on the island, for
he knew that he could expect no outsid e
help. In addition to the mobilized
Boeitai and a continuing stream of Okinawan conscriptees, the Japanese commander attempted to free his uniforme d
labor and service personnel for frontline duty by replacing them with ablebodied males from the large populatio n
of the island. In February 1945, more
than 39,000 Okinawans were assigne d
to Japanese Army units on the island .
The natives were placed into such categories as Main Labor (22,383), Auxiliary Labor (14,415) , and Student Labo r
(2,944) . 39 The Japanese attempted to
evacuate to the northern part of th e
island all of the rest of the populatio n
who were incapable of aiding the wa r
effort or who were potential obstacles in
the battle zone. 4 0
General Ushijima found the additional infantry troops he required in th e
ranks of Thirty-second Army special
and service units. The first elements
affected by an army-wide reorganization at this time were seven sea-raidin g
base battalions. Each suicide squadron
was supported by a base battalion of
900 men, and since they had completed
""Thirty-second Army Assignment of Con -
script Labor, dtd Feb45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 161-45, Translations and Interrogations No. 34, dtd 27Jun45 .
40 "Standards for the Establishment of Nansei Shoto Garrison Plans, dtd 1Jan45," i n
CICAS Trans No. 83 ; Okinawa Operations
Record, pp. 59-60.
their basic assignment of cave an d
suicide boat site construction, the army
decided to utilize these men in an are a
where they were critically needed . Beginning 13 February 1945, these battalions, although retaining their original numerical designations, were reassigned as the 1st, 2d, 3d, 26th, 27th ,
28th, and 29th Independent Battalions
(each averaging about 600 men) to the
24th and 44th IMB for thorough training and subsequent absorption . 41 Only
the maintenance company of each battalion was to remain with its respective
sea-raiding suicide unit. In comparison
with the regular infantry of the Japanese Army, the new battalions were
poorly trained and equipped, but these
4,500—5,000 men invested enemy force s
with an additional source of strength .
During the next month, March, a fina l
army reorganization took place, at
which time the Thirty-second Army
directed "the various shipping, air, an d
rear echelon forces [to] set up organizations and dispositions for land combat." 42 Besides their basic missions,
these units now had to give infantr y
training and field fortification construction priority in their schedules. The
March reorganization supplied the army
with two brigades and a regiment which
appeared more significant on paper than
actually was the case. These lightly
equipped and untrained service troop s
could serve only as combat replacements
with slight tactical value .
'l IntelMono, pt I sec A p . 10.
42 "Thirty-second Army OpOrd A-113, Reorganization of Service Units into Comba t
Troops, dtd 21Mar45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA
Bul 107-45, Translations and Interrogation s
No. 28, dtd 14May45, p. 15.
54 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Units from the 19th Air Sector Headquarters were funneled into the 1st
Specially Established Regiment which,
under 62d Division control, was responsible for the defense of the areas in the
vicinity of Kadena and Yontan airfields.
Support positions in the Naha-Yonabaru
valley were assumed by the 1st Specially Established Brigade, composed of
three regiments and formed from
Thirty-second Army transport, ordnance, construction, and supply troop s
formerly within the 49th Line of Communications Headquarters command. A
2d Specially Established Brigade o f
three regiments, culled from the 11th
Shipping Group Headquarters shipping,
sea transport, and engineer rosters, wa s
deployed in support of the 24th Division
mission—the defense of southernmost
Okinawa. "Army rear echelon agencies
not included in this order and their personnel will be under command of th e
front line unit in the vicinity wher e
their duties are carried on, and will
reinforce it in combat," stated the allinclusive 21 March order which put th e
entire Thirty-second Army in a status
of general mobilization for combat . 4 3
By 26 March, Okinawa Base Forc e
naval and civilian personnel had been
formed into the same type of jerry-built,
poorly equipped, and undertrained defense units as had been the servic e
troops of the Thirty-second Army. On
Oroku Peninsula, naval lieutenants
commanded those units designated a s
battalions while lieutenants (junior
grade) became company commanders.
Admiral Ota's 13mm and 25mm antiaircraft batteries were re-equipped an d
43 Ibid.
transformed into an 81mm mortar battery and two independent machine gu n
battalions and, thus armed, were th e
only adequately weaponed units in th e
naval garrison.
In less than two months after the
first reorganization order had been published, General Ushijima had nearl y
doubled the potential combat strength
of his army by the addition of approximately 20,000 Boeitai, naval, and service troops. Hurriedly, the concerte d
efforts of this determined Japanese
force converted the Shuri area into
what was to be an almost impregnabl e
bastion, for the final defensive plan was
strengthened by the defenders' determination to hold Shuri to the last man.
Concurrent with the February army
reorganization, the troops were deployed in their final positions. General
Ushijima's main battle force was with -
drawn to an outpost zone just north o f
Futema, while elements of the 1st
Specially Established Regiment were
loosely disposed in the area immediately
behind the Hagushi beaches. Although
this was the least likely place where th e
Americans were expected to land, th e
Japanese troops defending this area
were to fight a delaying action in any
such eventuality, and then, after destroying the Yontan and Kadena air -
fields, were to beat a hasty retreat to the
Shuri lines.
In the suspected invasion area, the
Minatogawa beaches, the bulk of the
Japanese infantry and artillery force s
were positioned to oppose the landings.
The 5th Artillery Command observation
post was established near Itokazu in
control of all of its major components ,
which had been emplaced in defense of
THE TARGET AND THE ENEMY 55
the Minatogawa sector. Since landings
further north on Chinen Peninsul a
would give the invaders a relatively unopposed, direct route into the heart o f
the major Japanese defense system, the
44th IMB was assigned control of the
rugged heights of the peninsula. The
24th Division, taking over the defens e
works begun by the 9th Division, occupied the southern portion of Okinaw a
from Kiyan Point to an area just north
of Tsukasan. The whole of Oroku
Peninsula was assigned to Admira l
Ota's forces, who were prepared to figh t
the "Navy Way," contesting the invasion at the beaches in a manner reminiscent of the Japanese defense of
Tarawa. 4 4
Since the heart and soul of the Japanese defenses were located at Shuri ,
the most valuable and only battle-tested
organization on the island, the 62d Division, was charged with the protection of
this vital area. The Japanese had
shrewdly and industriously constructe d
a stronghold centered in a series of con -
centric rings, each of which bristle d
with well dug-in, expertly sited weapons. Regardless of where the American s
landed, either at Hagushi or Minatogawa or both, the plans called fo r
delaying actions and, finally, a withdrawal into the hard shell of these well -
disguised positions.
" Although the Base Force was under command of the Thirty-second Army and Admira l
Ota sincerely attempted to cooperate with the
army, classic interservice rivalry apparent in
many Japanese Pacific operations, on a lowe r
echelon in the case of Okinawa, hampered th e
naval commander's desires. "Naval Units on
Okinawa," in POW InterSum No. 16, dtd
28Ju145.
The isolated north was defended by
the Udo Force, so-called after its leader
and commanding officer of the 2 d
Infantry Unit—Colonel Takehiko Udo.
Its mission was twofold, defense of bot h
Motobu Peninsula and Ie Shima . The
reinforced battalion on Ie Shima was
assigned secondary missions of destroying the island's airfield and assisting i n
the transfer of aviation materiel to th e
main island. Upon completion of thes e
duties, the unit was then to return to
Okinawa where it would be assigned to
the control of the 62d Division. Udo's
battalion on Motobu Peninsula, in expectation of an invasion of Ie Shima
followed by a landing on the peninsula ,
was disposed with its few artiller y
pieces so placed as to make its positions
and positions on Ie Shima mutually sup -
porting. As a result of its detachmen t
earlier from the larger portion of the
Thirty-second Army, Udo's comman d
was destined to fulfill a hopeless under -
taking to the very end .
Air defense was not included in the
Thirty-second Army plan, nor was any
great aviation force available t o
Ushijima. He had expected that approximately 300 airplanes would be sen t
to Okinawa, but feared that their projected time of arrival, April, would b e
too late to influence the local situation .
The American preinvasion air and
naval bombardments in March, combined with planned Japanese destruction efforts, had rendered the Ie Shima,
Yontan, Kadena, and Oroku airfields
unusable.
The army did expect, however, that
its exertions would be complemented by
56 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
the combat activity of its organic suicide sea units. The sea-raiding squadrons located at positions in Kerama
Retto and along the Okinawa coast,
would "blast to pieces the enemy transport groups with a whirlwind attack i n
the vicinity of their anchorages."'"
Unfortunately for the Japanese, their
midget submarines and motor torped o
boats at Unten-Ko could not join this
offensive endeavor, for, by the day of
the American invasion, they had all
been destroyed by American carrier
strikes or scattered in the aftermath o f
an unsuccessful attack on the destroye r
Tolman of Task Force 52. 4 6
The significance of Thirty-secon d
Army deployments and redeployments,
the frenzied last-minute preparations,
and the general air of expectancy wer e
not lost upon even the lowest ranks. One
private wrote as early as February, "i t
appears that the army has finally decided to wage a decisive battle on Okinawa." 47 Another soldier noted tha t
""Thirty-second Army OpOrd A 115, dt d
23Mar45," in CICAS Trans No. 321.
40
"Naval Units on Okinawa," in POW InterSum No. 16, dtd 28Ju145 ; CTF 52 AR, Okinawa
Gunto, 21Mar-20Apr45, dtd 1May45, chap III,
p. 9, hereafter CTF 52 AR.
""Diary of a superior private, 272d IIB,"
in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 147-45, Translation s
and Interrogations No. 32, dtd 16Jun45, p. 48.
"it's like a frog meeting a snake, just
waiting for the snake to eat him." 4 8
Between 20 and 23 March 1945, the
Japanese command on Okinawa made
an even more realistic estimate than had
the troops of what the future held fo r
the garrison. The Japanese reacted to
news of a conference held in Washington
between Admirals King and Nimitz in
early March by placing a general aler t
into effect "for the end of March an d
early April," since statistics demonstrated "that new operations occur
from 20 days to one month afte r
[American] conferences on strategy ar e
held." 49 This estimate of when the
Americans were expected was reduce d
three days after its publication following receipt of reports of increased shipping in the Marianas, and when repeate d
submarine sightings and contacts wer e
made. All of this enabled the Japanes e
intelligence officers to predict without
hesitation that the target was to b e
"Formosa or the Nansei Shoto, especially Okinawa ." 5 0
40 "Diary of a radioman, 5th Harbor Bas e
Unit," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 161-45 ,
Translations and Interrogations No . 34, dtd
27Jun45, p. 50.
48 "
Thirty-second Army Estimate of the Situation, dtd 20Mar45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA
Bul 140-45, Translations and Interrogations
No. 31, dtd 7Jun45, p . 5.
50 "62d Division IntelRpt on Findings Since
the 2OMar Rpt, dtd 23Mar45," in Ibid., p . 6 .
CHAPTER 2
Project ICEBERG
THE TASK DEFINED '
Three weeks after receipt of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff directive ordering
the Okinawa invasion, Admiral Nimitz'
headquarters published and distribute d
the ICEBERG Joint Staff Study . This
study served as a planning guideline for
the units assigned to the campaign an d
defined for them the objectives, the allotment of forces, and roughly outlined
the scheme of maneuver ashore .
Although Operation CAUSEWAY,
the invasion of Formosa, had been can -
celled in favor of ICEBERG, the principal commanders for CAUSEWAY were
retained for the Okinawa landing an d
redirected their staffs' efforts towards
planning for the assault on the newl y
assigned target. Admiral Raymond A.
Spruance, whose Task Force 50 (TF
50) contained the Fifth Fleet and the
Central Pacific Task Forces, was mad e
responsible for the Ryukyus operation .
His staff, previously charged with pre -
paring plans for the Iwo Jima invasion
' Unless otherwise noted, the material in this
section is derived from : ICEBERG Study ;
CinCPac-CinCPOA OPlan 14–44, dtd 31Dec44,
hereafter CinCPOA OPlan 14–44 ; USAFMidPac G–5 Hist ; ComFifthFlt OPlan 1–45, dtd
3Jan45, hereafter ComFifthFlt OPlan 1–45 ;
CG, Tenth Army TntvOPlan 1–45, ICEBERG ,
dtd 6Jan45, hereafter Tenth Army TntvOPlan
1–45; Samuel Eliot Morison, Victory in the
Pacific, 1945—History of United States Nava l
Operations in World War II, v . XIV, (Boston :
Little, Brown and Company, 1960), hereafter
Morison, Victory in the Pacific.
scheduled for 20 January 1945, was now
given the concurrent assignment of
planning for Okinawa .
Certain assumptions governed task
planning and the assignment of assault
and garrison forces for ICEBERG. Adherence to the scheduled 1 March 194 5
invasion date (L-Day) for Okinaw a
was based on the presupposed seizure of
Iwo Jima at a date early enough to permit release of naval gunfire and air
support units for the second operation .
It was further assumed that ICEBERG
commanders would be able to secure th e
prompt release from General MacArthu r
of assault shipping, support shipping ,
supporting naval forces, and Army
troops assigned to the Philippines operation which had been earmarked for us e
later at Okinawa. Finally, before Okinawa was invaded, Allied air and surface superiority had to be gained in the
target area.
This last point was one of the most
important in the overall concept of the
operation, for it was believed that air
attacks on Japan, together with the con -
quest of Iwo Jima, would force a concen -
tration of Japanese air strength on the
bases which ringed the Home Islands. It
would be necessary, therefore, to destro y
enemy air installations at Japanese stag -
ing areas in Kyushu and Formosa, and
neutralize those at Okinawa, since it wa s
a basic assumption that enemy aircraft
would vigorously oppose any invasio n
attempt. For this reason, the scheme o f
maneuver ashore included plans for th e
57
58 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
early securing of airfields on Okinaw a
and their equally early use by Allied
land-based aircraft. Japanese sea communications in the Ryukyus area were t o
be severed before the operation by surface and air attacks on enemy shipping
and by a maximum effort mounted b y
American submarines.
According to the ICEBERG staff study ,
operations ashore were to be conducted
in three phases. To be accomplished i n
the first phase were the capture of th e
southern portion of Okinawa and small
adjacent islands and the initial development of base facilities. In Phase II, I e
Shima and the remainder of Okinawa
were to be seized and the base build-up
continued with the construction of installations in favorable locations designated in the development plan. Phase
III required the exploitation of Allied
positions in the Nansei Shoto and, whe n
Admiral Nimitz directed, the seizure an d
development of additional position s
with forces then locally available . (See
Map 4. )
It was envisoned that an army of two
corps, each composed of three reinforce d
infantry divisions, would be required i n
the initial assault. In addition, two divisions were to be assigned as area
reserve. Okinawa's proximity to th e
heart of the Empire as well as to other
major Japanese bases, and the expectation of fanatic resistance by enemy
troops on a battleground of such large
dimensions, presaged a prolonged period
of fierce combat. For these reasons, a
new command relationship was established for the Okinawa operation differing, in some respects, from that whic h
had been effective in previous Pacific
campaigns.
As strategic commander of the invasion forces, Admiral Nimitz directed
that the chain of command woul d
descend to Admiral Spruance, thence to
Vice Admiral Richmond K . Turner who
would command Task Force 51 (Joint
Expeditionary Force), and then to Lieutenant General Simon B. Buckner, Jr. ,
USA, who would command the Army ,
Navy, and Marine units comprising the
Expeditionary Troops. When Spruance
had determined that the amphibious
phase of the invasion had ended, he
would pass the command of all force s
ashore to Buckner. As Commanding
General of the Tenth Army, Buckne r
would assume responsibility for the defense and development of positions captured on the island. When the situatio n
permitted, he would also relieve Admira l
Spruance of the responsibility for the
defense and development of the Ryukyus
as a whole and, at that time, he woul d
be directly responsible to CinCPOA fo r
the captured island positions and fo r
the waters within a 25-mile radius. Concurrently, responsibility for the establishment of an Island Command and a
military government on Okinawa woul d
be General Buckner's also.
ALLIED COMMANDERS AND
FORCES 2
Many units of Admiral Nimitz' command not directly assigned Task Forc e
50 were to support the Okinawa landin g
2 Unless otherwise noted the material in this
section is derived from : ICEBERG Study ;
CinCPOA OPlan 14-44 ; USAFMidPac G- 5
Hist ; ComFifthFlt OPlan 1-45 ; Tenth Army
TntvOPlan 1-45 ; Morison, Victory in the
Pacific.

60 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
from bases widespread in the Pacifi c
Ocean Areas. Additionally, from their
airdromes in China and the Southwest
Pacific, Army Air Forces elements wer e
to assist the ICEBERG effort, both prior
to and during the course of the campaign. In all, about 548,000 men of the
Marine Corps, Army, and Navy, together with 318 combatant and 1,13 9
auxiliary vessels—exclusive of numerous small personnel craft of all types 3
—and a profusion of strategic and tactical aircraft were to strike some of the
last blows dooming the Japanese attempts to gain supremacy in Asia an d
the Pacific.
In the Fifth Fleet were the Coverin g
Forces and Special Groups which included the Fast Carrier Force (TF 58 ,
Vice Admiral Marc A. Mitscher) and th e
British Carrier Force (TF 57, Vice Admiral Sir H. Bernard Rawlings, RN) .
These two forces were to conduct air
strikes and neutralize Japanese air
power prior to the landing, and preven t
enemy air and surface interference wit h
the Allied landing and subsequent occupation of Okinawa.
The units more directly concerned
with the landing were components of
Turner's Task Force 51. Its complex
composition reflected its many assignments incident to the capture, occupation, and defense of Okinawa. Any
enemy attempt to disrupt the movemen t
to the target or landing on the beach
would be handled by the force's support
elements . These naval units would als o
undertake air support and minesweeping operations once the beachhead ha d
been gained. Assignments for these
3 War Reports, p . 664.
tasks were allocated, in turn, to the
Amphibious Support Force (TF 52,
Rear Admiral William H. P. Blandy)
which provided direct air and naval
support, and to the Gunfire and Covering Force (TF 54, Rear Admiral Morto n
L. Deyo) . 4 The Northern Attack Force
(TF 53, Rear Admiral Lawrence F.
Reifsnider) and the Southern Attack
Force (TF 55, Rear Admiral John L.
Hall, Jr.,) contained the transports
which were to lift the assault troops
to the objective and the tractor unit s
which were to land them on L-Day .
The assault of Okinawa and its surrounding islands was to be accomplished
by the landing forces of Buckner's Expeditionary Troops (TF 56) . The assault force of the Northern Attack
Force was Major General Roy S.
Geiger's III Amphibious Corps (IIIAC) ,
composed of the 1st Marine Division
(Major General Pedro A. del Valle)
and the 6th Marine Division (Major
General Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr.) . The
Army XXIV Corps (Major General
John R. Hodge) would be lifted by th e
Southern Attack Force and would consist of the 7th Infantry Division (Majo r
General Archibald V. Arnold) and the
96th Infantry Division (Major Genera l
James L. Bradley) .
One other major Marine echelon in
the Tenth Army was Major General
Francis P. Mulcahy's joint air task
4 Vice Admiral Jesse B. Oldendorf, originally
the commander of TF 54, was injured at
Ulithi shortly before the operation. "Fortunately, Rear Admiral Morton L. Deyo, veteran
gunfire support commander in Operation
OVERLORD [Normandy invasion] and DRAGOON [invasion of southern France], wa s
available to relieve Admiral Oldendorf. "
Morison, Victory in the Pacific, p . 109 .
PROJECT ICEBERG 61
command, Tactical Air Force (TAF) ,
which was to provide land-based ai r
support for the operation once its squadrons were ashore . The elements initially assigned to TAF were to come
primarily from the 2d Marine Aircraft
Wing (2d MAW) . Although TAF wa s
established under the Tenth Army on
21 November 1944, its staff was not
really organized until late in December.
By that time, much of the earlier, basic ,
and important preinvasion planning had
been completed without TAF participation. As a matter of fact, the last of
the personnel assigned to TAF staff did
not even report until after the assault
echelon had already left for the target. 5
Although he had not taken part in ICEBERG planning, General Mulcahy was
kept fully abreast of Tenth Army activities and decisions by his chief of staff,
Colonel Perry O. Parmelee, who dail y
visited Buckner's headquarters and attended briefings and conferences there . 6
A most important element of TAF
was its fighter arm, the Air Defense
Command (ADC), headed by Brigadie r
General William J. Wallace who ha d
'Tenth Army AR, chap 11, sec IV, pp . 2–3 ;
TAF WarDs, 290ct44-31Jan45 ; Tactical Air
Force, Tenth Army, AR, Ph I, Nansei Shoto,
8Dec44-30Jun45, dtd 12Ju145, pt I, chap 3, p . 2,
hereafter TAF AR.
a MajGen Ford O. Rogers interview with
HistBr, HQMC, dtd 14Apr66, (Oral Histor y
Collection, HistBr, HQMC), hereafter Rogers
interview. General, then Colonel, Rogers, wh o
was the Air Defense Command Chief of Staff,
did not arrive at Pearl Harbor to take over hi s
new job until early January 1945. In commenting on the fact that TAF and the Air Defens e
Command had not participated in planning fo r
the invasion, General Rogers said that it had
no serious or visible effect on the conduct of
Marine air operations at Okinawa .
formerly been AirFMFPac Chief of
Staff. Wallace's squadrons were to be -
gin operations from previously designated airfields on Okinawa as soon a s
they had been captured by the ground
troops. Initially, General Wallace's command consisted of a headquarters
squadron and a service squadron, and
three MAGs with a total complement
of nine fighter, two night fighter, and
four air warning squadrons. The radar
installations of the units last named
would give early warning of enemy ai r
attacks. An Army Air Forces fighter
wing was also part of ADC, but only
one group was to join TAF before the
campaign was brought to a close.
General Mulcahy's Bomber Command
was made up wholly of AAF flight and
support elements, none of which arrived
on Okinawa before the beginning of
June. Photographic coverage of enemy
installations, interpretation of the pictures thus obtained, and an aerial photographic survey of the island for mapping purposes were to be the mission s
of an AAF photo-reconnaissance squadron which was also part of the TAF
organization.
Rounding out the Tenth Army air
force were two Marine torpedo-bomber
squadrons which were to conduct anti -
submarine warfare operations together
with the carrier-based naval aircraft a t
the target. The Marine squadrons wer e
also prepared to conduct bombing attacks on ground targets and any othe r
missions when the need for them arose .
Marine aviation, other than that
which was organic to TAF, was to pla y
an important part in the invasion.
Artillery spotting was the assigned
mission of Marine observation squad-
62 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
rons attached to the Marine division s
and corps. Scheduled to control all aircraft in support of the ground force s
were Colonel Vernon E. Megee's Landing Force Air Support Control Units
(LFASCUs) . When directed by Admiral Turner, LFASCUs, set up ashor e
at the headquarters of Tenth Army an d
its two corps, would take over contro l
from their shipboard naval counterparts.
In addition to the tactical units assigned to the Tenth Army for the assault
and consolidation phases of the operation, General Buckner was to have direct command of the defense and service
troops assigned for the garrison phase .
Major General Fred C. Wallace, USA,
was designated Island Commander, Okinawa, 7 while the Naval Forces, Ryukyus, were to be commanded by Rea r
Admiral Calvin H. Cobb, who would assume his command upon completion of
the amphibious phase of the operation .
Although strategic air force and nava l
search squadrons were to be based o n
Okinawa, they would remain under th e
operational control of the Commanding
General, Army Air Forces, Pacifi c
Ocean Area, and Commander, Fifth
Fleet, respectively.
Infantry units were assigned also to
the Western Islands Attack Group (T G
51.1, Rear Admiral Ingolf N. Kiland)
which had the 77th Infantry Division
(Major General Andrew D. Bruce) as
its landing force ; the Demonstratio n
Group (TG 51 .2, Rear Admiral Jerauld
Wright) whose landing force was th e
'
This command also was to include the Ie
Shima garrison, and, on Okinawa, the Naval
Operating Base and the Naval Air Bases.
2d Marine Division (Major General
Thomas E . Watson) ; and the Floating
Reserve Group (TG 51 .3, Commodore
John B. McGovern) which carried 27th
Infantry Division (Major Genera l
George W. Griner, Jr .) .
JOINT PREPARATIONS AND
PLANNING 8
Intensive joint planning attested t o
the immensity of the future operation .
Smooth Army, Navy, and Marine Corps
coordination of operational, logistical ,
and administrative matters was imperative. Since the Tenth Army, under
CinCPOA, would consist of an Arm y
corps and a Marine amphibious corps,
and a large naval contingent, General
Buckner believed that it was important
for him to have a joint staff. He therefore requested Admiral Nimitz to authorize a Marine and naval augmentation of his staff. When this request was
granted, approximately 30 Marine and
30 Navy officers, and enlisted assistants
from each of these services, were assigned and integrated within the Tent h
Army staff. "There was no Marine or
naval section of the staff." 9 One of the
Marine officers was Brigadier Genera l
Oliver P. Smith, who became the Marin e
Deputy Chief of Staff ; he had been the
Assistant Division Commander of th e
Unless otherwise noted the material in this
section is derived from : Tenth Army AR; 1st
MarDiv SAR, Nansei Shoto, lApr-31Jun45 ,
dtd 1Jul, hereafter 1st MarDiv SAR ; 6th
MarDiv SAR, Okinawa Operation, Phases I
and II, dtd 30Apr45, hereafter 6th MarDiv
SAR, PhI&II.
s Gen Oliver P. Smith, Personal Narrative,
n. d., p. 4, hereafter Smith, Personal Narrative .
PROJECT ICEBERG 63
1st Marine Division in the Peleliu campaign. His counterpart on the Tenth
Army staff was Brigadier General
Lawrence E . Schick, who filled the billet
of Army Deputy Chief of Staff.
When General Smith arrived at Tenth
Army headquarters, he found that CinCPOA had already approved the Marine
augmentation for the Army staff. The
Marine general believed that this augmentation was overly large, for :
This padding would result in Marin e
officers doing clerical duty at Army Headquarters as there were manifestly no t
enough bona fide billets to take care of al l
the Army officers on the staff as well as
the Marine and naval officers.
lo
After considerable discussion with the
Army officer responsible for the assignment of staff billets, General Smith
managed to have the number of Marin e
officers on the Tenth Army staff reduce d
by nearly 30 percent. 1 1
A tactical concept based upon the
directive stated in the ICEBERG join t
staff study, and later incorporated in
the TF 50 operation plan, required
"early use of sufficient airdrome capacity in Okinawa, together with unloading
facilities adequate to support its development and to maintain positive contro l
of the air in the area." 12 In a study of
all landing beach areas in southern Okinawa, those beaches on the west coast
which lay north and south of Hagush i
were deemed to be best suited to sup10 Ibid., p. 25.
11 A list of the names of Marine officers on
the Tenth Army staff when ICEBERG force s
landed on Okinawa is located in Ibid., pp.
25-26.
13 ComFif thFlt OPlan 1-45, Anx B, p . 2 .
port the ICEBERG landing. Admiral
Turner's operation plan assumed tha t
there would be bitter Japanese air reaction to the Okinawa invasion ; that
enemy submarines would be very active
in the target area ; that the Japanes e
surface fleet might possibly sortie out
from its bases in Japan ; and, that attempts might be made to reinforce the
garrison on Okinawa. The first three
assumptions proved correct ; the fourth
was not tested because, in accordance
with the JCS directive ordering the invasion of Okinawa, Allied air and surface superiority had been gained prior
to L-Day.
Based on Admiral Turner's plan, th e
Tenth Army staff drew up Plan Fox ,
which committed the assault forces to
a landing on the west coast. Plan Fox
also included the pre-L-Day capture of
Keise Shima, since a study of this small
island indicated the feasibility of its us e
as a fixed emplacement for artiller y
which would first augment the naval
and air bombardment of the main objective before the landing, and afterwards provide support during the lan d
campaign. This plan, approved by
Buckner, was presented to Turner a t
the initial joint conference held at Pearl
Harbor on 1 November 1944.
Following this presentation, Turner
stated his views of the operation and
outlined what would be the requirements of the Navy during the course o f
ICEBERG. He believed that, prior to
the landings on Okinawa, the adjacent
islands had to be neutralized . Once this
had been done, the major landings on
Okinawa would be more secure and th e
fleet could be replenished in a safe an-
64 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
chorage without danger from enemy
surface vessels or submarines.
Two provisions of Plan Fox particularly concerned the Fifth Fleet commander. Because of the suspected presence of Japanese mines and submarine s
immediately west of Okinawa, shoul d
the Hagushi beaches be used for the invasion, the landings here would perforce
require the fleet to steam into a hazardous area. The second apprehension
arose because 1 March had been scheduled as L-Day . He feared that unfavorable weather conditions, which generall y
prevailed in March, might possibl y
affect the conduct of the landings and
unduly prolong the unloading of supplies on exposed beaches. Available
meteorological data justified this concern, for from October to March the
Ryukyus experienced strong northerl y
winds with a mean velocity of 17-1 9
miles-per-hour as well as frequent gales.
A generally moderate wind, averagin g
11 miles-per-hour, marked the beginning of the summer monsoon period an d
characterized the weather of Okinaw a
in April, which was a more suitable time
for the invasion. 13 In any case, Turne r
requested that the possibility of landings
along the east coast be restudied.
At the same time, he suggested that th e
value of a feint landing be determined
and, if valid, should be incorporated i n
the plan finally adopted for ICEBERG .
After a lengthy discussion of the problems inherent in the proposed plan, the
conferees concluded that a landing on
the western beaches on 1 March wa s
fraught with considerable risk. The alternatives were either a 30-day delay
13 HQUSAFPOA Study, sec XX, p . 1.
of the operation or a landing on the
southeast coast on the. date originally
scheduled for the assault . All other possible courses of action were re-examined ,
with the result that the Hagushi beache s
were recommended again as the site for
the landings. Final approval was withheld by Turner because he retained
doubts as to the practicality of landing
and supporting the proposed assaul t
force of four divisions over the Hagush i
beachhead. In spite of the objections of
Admiral Turner, the Plan Fox estimat e
was distributed on 5 November. 14 When
completed on 9 November, another detailed study upheld the original contention that Hagushi held the only beache s
in southern Okinawa adequate to receive four divisions abreast and, subsequently, to handle sufficient logistical
support for the operation.
In the face of these convincing arguments, Admiral Turner accepted th e
plan with the proviso that both Kerama
Retto and Keise Shima were to be captured prior to the main landing . With
minor exceptions, General Buckner concurred with these modifications, and th e
revised plan was forwarded to Turne r
on 11 November. The original target
date of 1 March was changed twice
within the next month, first to 15 Marc h
and finally to 1 April. The first change
was made on 19 November in anticipation of bad weather at the target at th e
beginning of March. On 7 December,
Admiral Nimitz advanced L-Day two
more weeks when doubts arose as t o
whether the shipping assigned to General MacArthur's Lingayen Gulf opera1' Smith, Personal Narrative, p . 13.
PROJECT ICEBERG 65
tions could be returned in time to permit
its reemployment at Okinawa.
1 5
Since the naval planning staff recommended a sustained seven- or eightday bombardment of the assaul t
beaches, the resulting expenditure o f
Navy supplies and ammunition woul d
force the bombardment group to eithe r
withdraw from the area for resuppl y
and refueling or to conduct these operations under dangerous conditions in the
open sea offshore of the objective .
Basically, it was this consideration that
prompted Turner's insistence on the
pre-L-Day capture of the entire Kerama
group. At first, these islands appeare d
to be only worthy as targets for amphibious raids in which the raiding
USAFMidPac G–5 Hist, pp. 183, 201 . "The
deferment of the target date to April 1 wa s
most fortunate from the logistic angle. Unde r
CinCPOA procedures, all maintenance supplie s
for Okinawa were to be shipped from the West
Coast to the control point at Ulithi (3d and
subsequent echelons were staged through
Eniwetok) for call forward as required . Requisitions for these supplies had to be in the
hands of West Coast supply agencies 60 days
prior to sailing date of the shipment . Due t o
the sailing time required, requisitions for the
first maintenance shipment to support a 1
March target date had to be on the West Coas t
by 20 November. With no firm tactical pla n
until after the conference with Admiral Turne r
on 9 November, and lacking a firm troop basis,
the determination of supply requirements had
to be based on very rough estimates. The 30-day
delay in target date enabled supply agencie s
to make a more careful estimate of the suppl y
requirements of the assault force. This delay
also enabled critical supplies and augmentation
personnel, required for the assault, to be
shipped to mounting points of the division s
(some had to be shipped by air) prior to
mounting date." BGen David H. Blakelock,
USA ltr to CMC, dtd 30ct54, hereafter
Blakelock ltr.
parties would retire after destroying
enemy coastal artillery . Later plans for
their capture grew out of Admiral
Turner's proposal that, once taken, the
Keramas provide a protected anchorage
for the establishment of a small-boa t
pool and a seaplane base.
Because the Kerama assault was no w
to be a full-scale invasion instead of a
raid., the assignment of a larger force
was indicated and Major General
Thomas E. Watson's 2d Marine Divisio n
was chosen initially. This unit, designated IIIAC Reserve, had been slate d
for early commitment in support of
operations on Okinawa, and so the tas k
of capturing the Keramas was given instead to the 77th Infantry Divisio n
while the Marine division was assigne d
tentatively to a feint landing off southeastern Okinawa . "
As the scope and importance of preliminary operations grew, the reserve s
which had been made available to General Buckner originally decreased i n
number, and it was found necessary t o
secure from CinCPOA release of the
area reserve division (27th Infantry
Division) . This unit was then designated as the Tenth Army floating reserve and was replaced by the 81st Infantry Division which remained in New
Caledonia under Admiral Nimitz' control.
The alternate plan for the operation,
Plan Baker, was approved on 3 January
1945. It envisioned first the capture of
"Tenth Army AR, chap 3, pp. 11–12. The
original concept of the operation anticipated
that the 2d Marine Division would come out
of army reserve, pass through the 1st Division ,
and take the Katchin Peninsula to the southeast of the latter's zone . 1st MarDiv SAR, chap
III, OperAnx, p . 1.
66 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Kerama Retto, followed by a sweep o f
the Eastern Islands by General Watson's Marines. Both of these actions
were to be conducted prior to the assault
of Okinawa itself. A mixed Marine
and Army corps artillery group was to
support both the XXIV and III Amphibious Corps assault of the east coast .
On L-Day, General Geiger's Marine s
would land between Chinen Point and
Minatoga, secure the high ground behind the beaches, and, following the
Army landing two days later, tie-in with
XXIV Corps at Yonabaru . After effecting this juncture, both corps were to
make a rapid advance across the island
during which time the Marines were to
take the airfield on Oroku Peninsula an d
the Army was to capture the unfinishe d
field at Yonabaru. Included in the alternate plan were provisions for the capture of Ie Shima, feints against Chimu
Wan on L plus 3 or 4, and, overall, th e
maintenance of flexibility of action in
the commitment of Army reserves to
either of the corps zones or for the protection of XXIV Corps' northern flank.
Although the principal advantages of
Plan Baker were that the approach t o
the east coast of Okinawa was more direct and the weather here was vastly
superior to that of the west coast, they
were outweighed by the disadvantages.
These included : (1) the difficulty of
providing optimum naval gunfire support because of the interposition of the
Eastern Islands and off-shore islets, (2 )
the paucity of good beaches, (3) the
length of time it would take to uncove r
airfields, located, for the most part, on
the west coast, and, (4) because o f
Plan Baker landing zone assignments,
the possibility that Japanese forces
might be able to concentrate considerable strength against IIIAC troops before they could even contact the XXI V
Corps. General Smith was convinced a t
this time that "in the advent of bad
weather on the west coast, landings
would have been delayed rather than re -
sort to the east coast landing as provided
in the alternate plan." 1 7
General Geiger became involved i n
the planning for ICEBERG in November 1944, when he was directed to report to General Buckner for plannin g
purposes. Upon receipt of this order,
the IIIAC commander immediately reported by dispatch . Shortly thereafter,
IIIAC headquarters received a copy o f
the tentative Plan Fox together with all
available intelligence on the prospective
target, and a request that Geiger prepare a tentative corps operation plan. When the IIIAC plan was completed ,
and at the request of Buckner, Geiger,
accompanied by his chief of staff, Colonel Merwin H. Silverthorn, 18 his G-2,
Lieutenant Colonel Sidney S . Wade, his
G-3, Colonel Walter A. Wachtler, his
G-4, Colonel Francis B. Loomis, Jr., and
other members of his staff, departe d
Guadalcanal for Pearl Harbor, arriving
at Schofield Barracks on 9 December .
After personally contacting their opposite numbers on the Tenth Army staff,
the IIIAC staff officers prepared to present their plan to General Buckner .
Geiger planned to employ the 1st and
6th Marine Divisions in the assault,
with General del Valle's division on th e
right or south flank. The choice of thes e
17 Smith, Personal Narrative, p . 30 .
1s Silverthorn was promoted to the rank of
brigadier general on 19 December while stil l
in Hawaii.
PROJECT ICEBERG 67
divisions was logical since they wer e
both located in the Solomons and ther e
would be no problem in establishing
liaison. The 2d Division, based on
Saipan, would be the floating reserve of
the army, according to the IIIAC plan.
The question then arose regarding wha t
steps would be taken if the Japanes e
were encountered in strength as IIIA C
advanced eastward across Okinawa, for
there was no doubt that an additional
division would have to be inserted in
the line before the east coast was
reached. General Smith took this question up with the Tenth Army commander, who agreed that IIIAC woul d
have first call on the 2d Marine Division. l a
General Watson's division was scheduled to make the feint landings on th e
southeast coast of Okinawa on L-Day
and L plus 1, and it was not contemplated that Geiger would need it before
the third day of the operation. The
IIIAC staff presented their plan orally
to General Buckner on 19 December ,
when it was approved . According to
General Smith, who was present on this
occasion, Geiger's staff members "did a
very creditable job . . . ." 2 0
SCHEME OF MANEUVER 2 1
Basically, the scheme of maneuver
ashore was designed to attain early use
t0 Smith, Personal Narrative, p . 28 .
20 Ibid.
"1 Unless otherwise noted the material in this
section is derived from : Tenth Army TntvOPlan 1—45 ; IIIAC OPlan 1—45, dtd 1Feb45 ,
hereafter IIIAC OPlan 1—45 ; 1st MarDiv
OPlan 1—45, ICEBERG, dtd 10Feb45, here -
after 1st MarDiv OPlan 1—45 ; 6th MarDi v
OPlan 1—45, dtd 10Feb45, hereafter 6th MarDiv OPlan 1—45.
910-229 0 - 69 - 6
of the airfields so that land-based air
supremacy over the target could b e
gained and held. An additional dividend derived from the capture of th e
airfields would be their use as staging
bases for continuing mass air raids o n
both Japan and those areas within flying range of Okinawa under enem y
control. As in the case of earlier amphibious landings in the Pacific, certain
preliminary softening-up steps had to
be taken before the main assault was
launched.
Kerama Retto was to be seized by the
77th Infantry Division (Reinforced) on
26 March 1945, or six days before LDay. Following the first day of operations in the Kerama Retto and beginning the night of the 26th, Marines o f
the FMF Amphibious Reconnaissanc e
Battalion were to reconnoiter the reef
islets of the island group . First they
were to investigate Keise Shima for th e
presence of enemy troops, and in th e
following days and nights prior to LDay, they were to land on Aware Shima ,
Mae Shima, and Kuro Shima . To support the landing on Okinawa, a field
artillery group of XXIV Corps Artillery
was to land and be emplaced on Keis e
Shima prior to L-Day . While these
operations were underway, Okinawa
would receive increased air and nava l
gunfire bombardment which would
mount in intensity until the first assault
waves neared the beaches. At this time ,
the fire would lift from the beach area
and continue inland.
The Army and Marine divisions were
to land on the Hagushi beaches, General
Geiger's corps on the left. The mouth
of the Bishi Gawa marked the beginning of the corps boundary, which
68 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
roughly followed the course of the rive r
to a point just north of Kadena ; here,
the line headed almost due east to bisec t
the island. (See Map 4. )
Once landed north of Hagushi town,
the Marine assault divisions were to
move rapidly inland, coordinating thei r
advance with that of XXIV Corps. On
the Marine left flank was the 6th Division ; the 22d Marines on the left and
the 4th Marines, less its 2d Battalion i n
division reserve, on the right . The 29th
Marines, the third infantry regiment
of the 6th Division, was corps reserve
and was to be ready to land on an y
of the beaches. It was also to be
prepared to revert one battalion landin g
team to the 6th Division on order.
General Shepherd's initial mission was
the capture of Yontan airfield whil e
protecting the northern flank of the
Tenth Army.
General del Valle's division, landin g
to the right of the 6th, was to assist in
the capture of Yontan by quickly seizing the high ground northeast of China.
The attack was then to continue, wit h
major emphasis placed on maintainin g
contact with General Hodge's corps and
assisting his advance . The 1st Marine
Division scheme of maneuver placed the
5th and 7th Marines in the assault, 7th
on the left, and the 1st Marines in division reserve .
Adjoining the 1st Marine Divisio n
was to be the 7th Infantry Division,
with one regiment in division reserve
but under the operational control of
XXIV Corps. The other Army assault
division was to be 96th, which was to
land with two regiments abreast and
a third in corps reserve .
Artillery support for the Marines was
to come from IIIAC Corps Artillery and
those artillery units organic to the divisions. General Geiger's guns were to
land on his order to support the attack
and, once ashore, corps artillery woul d
coordinate all supporting arms in the
Marine sector. XXIV Corps Artillery,
less the group on Keise Shima, would
land on General Hodge's order and sup -
port the attack with long-range interdiction, counterbattery, and harassin g
fires.
2 2
Following the initial landing, operations were designed to isolate the
Phase I objective, which consisted of
that part of the island lying south o f
a general line drawn across the Ichikawa Isthmus, through Chimu, and including the Eastern Islands. In order
to prevent enemy reinforcement from
the north and to fulfill its assignmen t
in Phase I, IIIAC was to gain contro l
of the isthmus as swiftly as possible .
To seal off the Japanese in the south,
General Hodge's troops were to drive
across the island, his right flank units
holding a line that ran through Futema
to Kuba Saki. Once the central portion
of the island had been captured an d
secured, the direction of attack would be
faced to the south and continued unti l
all of the objectives of the first phase
had been achieved.
Phase II, the seizure of northern Okinawa and the capture of Ie Shima, wa s
to be executed with Tenth Army troop s
locally available when Buckner was satisfied that Phase I had been accomplished. The first major military objec-
' 2 XXIV Corps F1dOrd 45, dtd 8Feb45, pp.
4-8.
PROJECT ICEBERG 69
tive in the north was Motobu Peninsula ,
which was to be taken by means of
simultaneously launched attacks from
sea and land. Once the peninsula ha d
been gained, a shore-to-shore assault
would be made against Ie Shima . The
end of Phase II would be signalled when
the rest of northern Okinawa had been
captured.
While higher echelon air planning for
ICEBERG detailed both strategic an d
tactical missions, the Tenth Army wa s
more immediately concerned with th e
latter. Carrier-based tactical aviation,
aboard the TF 52 escort carrier group
(TG 52.1, Rear Admiral Calvin T.
Durgin), was to provide the invasion
force with air support until Genera l
Mulcahy's squadrons were establishe d
ashore and could take over. At this time,
TAF would also be responsible fo r
overall air defense.
When this responsibility was assumed, TAF operations would be base d
on the following order of priority : (1)
attainment of air superiority by annihilation of enemy aircraft in the air
and on the ground, and destruction of
enemy air installations ; (2) interdiction and destruction of enemy troop and
supply movements immediately withi n
or heading towards the target area ;
and (3) execution of combined airground attacks on specific frontline objectives. The importance of the first
priority lay in Tenth Army recognition
of the yet-existing Japanese air strength
and the threat it posed to the invasion
force.
As soon as Air Defense Command
fighter squadrons were established
ashore on captured airfields, they were
to begin fulfilling their assigned missions. From these fields, ADC was t o
provide air defense to ground units on
the island and naval forces in its environs. Combat air patrols, close air
support, and other related flight missions were considered the means by
which the defense was to be maintained .
Although it was a function of ADC,
close air support is not normally a part
of air defense ; it is more closely associated with a ground offensive concept.
Despite this fact, however, Okinawa' s
terrain and the nature of the Japanese
defenses were to provide Marine aviators of the Air Defense Command with
ample opportunities to display close air
support techniques born of experience
accumulated in earlier Pacific campaigns.
LOGISTIC SUPPORT PLANNING 2 3
Fortunately for those preparing ICEBERG, much in the logistical plans for
the cancelled Formosa operation coul d
23 Unless otherwise noted the material in this
section is derived from : ICEBERG Study ;
CTF 51 OPlan Al—45, dtd 16Feb45, hereafte r
CTF 51 OPlan A1—45 ; CTF 51 General Action
Report, Capture of Okinawa Gunto, Phases I
and II, 17Feb-17May45, dtd 25Ju145, hereafte r
CTF 51 AR; CinCPOA OPlan 14—44 ; Tenth
Army TntvOPlan 1—45 ; Tenth Army AR;
USAFMidPac G—5 Hist ; IIIAC, AR, Ryukyu s
Operation, Phases I and II (Okinawa), dt d
1Ju145, hereafter IIIAC AR; Tactical Air
Force, Tenth Army, OPlan 1—45, dtd 10Feb45 ,
hereafter TAF OPLAN 1—45; TAF AR;
IsCom OPlan No . 1, LEGUMINOUS [code
name assigned to island of Okinawa], dtd
1Feb45, hereafter IsComOPlan No. 1;
IsCom, Okinawa, AR, 13Dec44-30Jun45, dtd
30Jun45, hereafter IsComAR ; War Reports;
1st MarDiv SAR ; 6th MarDiv SAR, Ph I & II .
70 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
be salvaged and adapted for the invasion of Okinawa with but few changes. Without competent logistics planning
of the highest order, and utilization of
a resupply and shipping support schedule designed to function with clockwork
precision, the target date for the Okinawa operation could not have been met .
This would have caused all related
planned strategy to have been either
nullified or advanced to a later date.
The logistics plan for Okinawa "wa s
the most elaborate one of its kind developed during World War II, involving
prearranged movement of both assault
and cargo shipping over vast ocean distances."24 The plan required establishment of a 6,000-mile-long supply line,
stretching across the Pacific, with 1 1
different ports-of-call, 25 to support the
mounting of 182,821 troops encumbere d
with some 746,850 measurement tons 2 6
of cargo loaded into 434 assault transports and landing ships.
A great limitation imposed upon pre -
invasion logistical planning was th e
shortage of shipping and the delay in
the return from the Philippines of th e
vessels which were to be used for Okinawa. Seeking a solution to lift and
timetable problems was not the only
concern of the Tenth Army logistics
°4 Robert W. Coakley and Richard M. Leigh -
ton, "Global Logistics and Strategy, 1943–194 5
—U. S. Army in World War II" (unpublished
MS, OCMH), pt VI, "Shift to a One-Fron t
War," chap XXIV, p . 26.
2E Guadalcanal, Espiritu Santo, New Georgia ,
Makin, Kwajalein, Saipan, Ulithi, Manus,
Milne Bay, Finschhafen, and Hollandia .
2e Measurement ton is defined as a unit o f
carrying capacity of a ship, usually equal t o
40 cubic feet; it is sometimes designated a
freight ton.
staff, "for the mere loading of mor e
ships led only to congestion at the receiving end unless the development o f
unloading facilities kept pace." 2 7
It had been decided that the Hagushi
beaches were sufficiently large to handl e
the supply tonnage required by the assault echelon of two corps and their sup -
port troops ; however, it was impossible
to prophesy exactly how soon after the
landings the beachhead would be secure d
and the advance continued inland, or ho w
soon thereafter base development could
begin and the supplies for this aspec t
of Phase I would be required and
available. Nor was it possible to fore -
cast the possibility that Phase II would
be completed before the accomplishmen t
of Phase I. Nonetheless, estimates o f
troop progress had to be made in order
to prepare a logistics plan at all.
The main features of the ICEBERG
logistics plan required an initial suppl y
level to be taken to Okinawa by the assault troops who were mounted at such
distantly scattered points as Leyte ,
Guadalcanal, Espiritu Santo, Banika,
Pavuvu, Saipan, Eniwetok, Oahu, and
the west coast of the United States.
Upon completion of the assault phas e
of the landing, a staggered series o f
supply shipments would replenish th e
Tenth Army in accordance with a schedule established earlier. This timetable
had been based on the estimated time
required to conduct combat operations
ashore and, in turn, on how quickly the
beach and port capacity could be expanded.
27 Coakley and Leighton, op . cit., pt V, "The
War Against Japan, 1943–1944," chap XVIII,
p. 3.
PROJECT ICEBERG 71
Beginning on 20 February 1945, ICE -
BERG replenishments were to leave th e
west coast every 10 days for regulating
points at Ulithi, Eniwetok, and Saipan ,
the first shipments to arrive at each
place on L minus 5 (27 March) . The
supplies would remain at these points
until they were called-up by General
Buckner. It was planned to continue
these automatic resupply shipments for
a period of 210 days beyond L-Day. The
Tenth Army was also to have emergency reserves located at Saipan, Tinian, and Guam.
The prediction of supply requirements depended upon completed tactica l
plans, a firm troop basis, and other
necessary items of information whic h
either were nonexistent or had not ye t
been made available to the logistics
planners. Adding to the logistics dilemma was the factor of time, for i t
look 120 days for supplies to be requisitioned, procured, and shipped from th e
Pacific Coast of the United States to
the objective .
To facilitate the preparation and shipment of resupply items in accordance
with the scheduling of the various invasion echelons, Army commanders established a standard unit of supply, o r
"block requisitions," tailored specifically to the organization of each of th e
support and assault elements. The
composition of the individual block
requisition was determined by estimating the logistic support required by a
particular unit for a given number of
days regardless of the combat situation .
In contrast to this approach, Marine
supply agencies, drawing on their experience, felt that the combat situation
as envisioned in the planning stage s
should govern the nature of the supplie s
requisitioned, and the number, types,
and frequency of shipments. Tenth
Army considered the Marine system to
be more flexible than the Army's because the requisitioning agencies were
better able to make the several automatic resupply shipments conform t o
their view of how the campaign would
progress.
Each service was responsible for initial support of its own elements in th e
Okinawa task force, with the exceptio n
of troops mounting in the South and
Southwest Pacific. Area commanders
there would be charged with logistica l
support of units assigned to ICEBERG .
After the landing had been accomplished, and when directed by Admira l
Turner, Island Command would tak e
over as the Tenth Army central support
agency charged with funneling supplie s
to all of the assault forces.
Early in January 28 it became obvious
that ICEBERG had been allocated in -
sufficient shipping to accomplish the
tactical mission, to support base development, and to lift to the target thos e
air units which were to be committed
early in the campaign. An inadequate
transport quota for engineer units,
whose services would be needed in th e
" Actually, questions regarding the allocation of shipping had appeared earlier, for on
24 November 1944, Colonel Francis B . Loomis,
Jr., the G—4 of IIIAC, reported in at the Tenth
Army headquarters for a short tour of temporary duty . General Geiger apparently was
concerned about the shipping problem and
believed it necessary to have a G—4 representative with the army. Smith, Personal Narrative ,
p . 9.
72 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
early development of airfields, roads,
and waterfront facilities, was improve d
slightly by scheduling the immediate
return of assault LSTs to Saipan afte r
the initial landings to shuttle eight naval
construction battalions (Seabees) to the
target. In the same manner, other LST s
would be sent to Leyte to pick up an y
XXIV Corps equipment not carried i n
assault shipping . 2 9
Of the overall inadequate shipping
situation and its effect on the combat
divisions, the former G–4 of the Tent h
Army recalled that, if needed, ICE -
BERG was to get all shipping availabl e
in the Pacific, because :
the amount of assault shipping assigned
for the operation was far below that required to properly lift the assault elements
of the Tenth Army . This resulted in [th e
Tenth Army being given] authority t o
modify Combat Loading Doctrine so that
the most essential equipment and supplie s
could accompany the assault echelon . Additional items that should have been in
the assault echelon were loaded in a subsequent shipping echelon. 3 0
The overall assault lift was augmented by other means also. Vessels to
be used for the Luzon and Iwo Jima
landings were made available later for
Okinawa through adherence to a stringently monitored and thoroughly regulated shipping schedule . Additional
space for Tenth Army troops was gained
by reducing the tonnage requirements
of IIIAC, substantially at the expens e
of the 2d Marine Division . It was rea-
=° Blakelock ltr.
'° BGen David H. Blakelock, USA, ltr to
Asst G-3, HQMC, dtd 6Nov65, hereafter
Blakelock ltr 1965.
soned that since the division was no t
going to be committed immediately, it
could acquire whatever additional shipping it needed within a short time
following the initial assault . Further
lift capacity was gained by loading
landing ships to their rated limits, by
the addition to the invasion flotilla of
newly constructed attack transports
(APAs) with greater cargo-carrying
characteristics, and by an increased allocation of landing ships, tank, (LSTs )
and landing ships, medium (LSMs) .
The shipping allocation for the garrison forces was governed by the estimated capacity of Okinawan beach and
port unloading facilities. Past experience, however, resolved the size of the
lift necessary to transport an assault
echelon of three reinforced Marine di -
visions, three reinforced Army divisions,
a Marine amphibious corps headquarters and corps troops, and an Army
corps headquarters and corps troops.
Thus, the required assault tonnage wa s
a firm figure from the beginning and
was deducted from that allotted to the
ICEBERG forces overall. The remainder
was assigned as the lift for Tenth Army
support troops, which included air,
naval, and airfield construction units.
After the Marianas and Palau operations, it was found that one transpor t
group (12 APAs and 3 cargo ships,
attack (AKAs) ), made up of thre e
transport divisions, had sufficient lift
capacity for a combat-loaded reinforce d
infantry division. For the ICEBER G
lift, however, a new shipping echelon,
the transport squadron (transron) was
formed to carry a proportionate shar e
of assault forces, corps troops, and ele-
PROJECT ICEBERG 73
ments from corps and army headquarters. The transron was nothing but the
old transport group augmented by thre e
APAs and three AKAs.
Each transron was to be accompanie d
by one APH, which was a troop transport specially rigged as a hospital an d
equipped to treat casualties and then
evacuate them from the battle zone. 3 1
There were to be six hospital ships
(AHs) assigned to ICEBERG ; one was
to be on station L minus 5 with the
Kerama Retto invasion group, three
were assigned to the main attack forces
and were to arrive off Hagushi on L plus
1, while the other two were scheduled
to reach Okinawa three days later.
Improved casualty evacuation wa s
planned for this invasion by assigning
four hospital landing ships (LST (H) s)
to each of the two naval attack force s
in the major assault. Assigned to each
vessel was a naval medical officer who
functioned as an evacuation control
officer and, as such, was responsible for
screening the wounded as they arrived ,
giving treatment and classifying them
with reference to their estimated recovery time, and transferring the casualtie s
in accordance with the provisions of a
system related to their recovery classification. Accordingly, hospital ship s
would evacuate those men wounde d
seriously enough to require hospitalization for two months or more . Casualtie s
requiring treatment for a minimum o f
a1 The APH should not be confused with th e
better-known hospital ship (AH), which i s
unarmed and protected only by internationa l
recognition of the provisions of the Genev a
Convention.
two and a maximum of eight weeks
would be evacuated in APHs during the
initial assault phase and, after that ,
would receive further treatment i n
hospitals established on Okinawa . Those
men who could be returned to duty
within two weeks after being wounde d
would be treated and held in the hospita l
transports or landing ships until the y
had fully recovered or until the landbased hospitals had been established .
The LST (H) s were to remain on station until released by Admiral Turner ,
at which time the medical officers aboard
would land and assign casualties directl y
to the ships from aid stations set up o n
the beaches. When General Buckner assumed command ashore, he would
become responsible for the establishmen t
and administration of medical services
on the island, and for air evacuatio n
of casualties, when airfields becam e
operational.
The equipment and supplies to be
taken to Okinawa by the corps and the
divisions had been specifically designated by Tenth Army order. After cargo
space in assigned shipping had been allo -
cated to this material, any other available space would be filled by additional
items which the corps and division commanders had decided the troops coul d
carry. Logistical planning on the di -
vision level was influenced by the supposition that the beaches would be heavil y
defended and that the inland advance
stubbornly resisted. As a result, only
"hot cargo," predetermined blocks of
high-priority supplies, was to be lande d
on L-Day. Included in a block of cargo
74 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
were one CinCPOA unit of fire 32 for
all weapons and rations and water for
one day. Moreover, all organic division
motor transport would be taken to th e
target in available shipping space because the prospect of prolonged operations over a relatively large land mass
envisioned wide-spread use of vehicles . 3 3
To assist in Marine logistical plannin g
and preparations, Fleet Marine Force ,
Pacific, established the 2d Field Service
Command on Guadalcanal . Here relatively close liaison could be maintained
with Marine ICEBERG elements mounting from the Solomons. This service
command was empowered to coordinate
the efforts of the supply agencies of
both the 1st and 6th Marine Divisions
and to deal with Army and Navy sources
of supply directly. In the same manner,
the Marianas-based 1st Field Service
Command assisted the 2d Marine Division. Re-equipment of General del Valle' s
division on Pavuvu was relatively simpl e
since its primary supply source, the 4th
Base Depot, under the 2d Field Servic e
Command, was on the other major
island in the Russells, Banika. General
Shepherd's division experienced some
difficulties, however, because its suppl y
source was a transfer rather than a
"' CinCPOA Unit of Fire Table, dtd 6Dec44 ,
included in Tenth Army TntvOPlan 1-45, Anx
13, App B, was based on the successful criteri a
established by use during the Central Pacific
landings. Allocation of ammunition for various
ordnance was, for example : 100 rounds for
each M—1 ; 1,500 rounds for .30 caliber and 60 0
rounds for .50 caliber machine guns ; 275
rounds for 60mm and 81mm mortars; 250
rounds for 105mm howitzers ; 150 rounds fo r
155mm howitzers.
"1st MarDiv SAR, pp. 1-2.
stocking agency and had to obtain its
requisitioned items from the 4th Bas e
Depot. As a result of the cumbersome
and time-consuming administrative procedures involved in processing requisitions through the several service
echelons in the area, the 6th Divisio n
experienced many delays in the delivery
of much of its needed equipment an d
supplies. 34 Both assault divisions, how -
ever, embarked for the target with but
few shortages, none of which affected
combat readiness and efficiency.
By the time that the TAF logistics section had been activated, AirFMFPac
had already issued warning orders and
was in the process of preparing subordinate units for the impending campaign .
The basis for logistic support of Marin e
aviation units was different, in certai n
ways, from that of Marine ground elements. While items peculiar to the Marine Corps were drawn by both ground
and air units from the same sources, al l
technical aviation materiel was receive d
through Navy supply channels or, i n
some cases, from the Army . Since this
was the case, the TAF logistics staf
established liaison with representative s
of Commander., Aircraft, Pacific Flee t
(ComAirPac) , the agency responsible
for fulfilling the fuel and installation
requirements at the Okinawa air field s
the TAF units were to occupy . The supply section of Commander, Naval Ai r
Bases, Okinawa (ComNABS) was made
"° 6th MarDiv SAR, Okinawa Op, Ph III, dt d
30Jun45, pp. 5-6, hereafter 6th MarDiv SAR,
Ph III, and including the SARs of the following
units : 4th, 15th, 22d, and 29th Marines, hereafter (unit) SAR, Ph III.
PROJECT ICEBERG 75
the ComAirPac type command logistics
representative for these matters.
All other supply requirements wer e
to be handled by the supply section o f
the Navy's Pacific service command .
Liaison was also established with Army
Air Forces logistics representatives to
determine the nature and extent of support required by Army elements in General Mulcahy's command . Arrangements
were then made to obtain special comba t
clothing and equipment for the AA F
personnel to be assigned to TAF . Based
upon the latter's recommendations, automatic resupply shipments for the Army
squadrons were adjusted to coincid e
with the schedule established for the
Marines.
The organization and general administration of the supply system on Okinawa was to be an Island Command
function, in which it would receive and
distribute Tenth Army supplies. The
Marine groups in TAF, however, woul d
support their own squadrons and woul d
draw Marine Corps supplies from the
2d Wing or other designated Marine
sources. Air base commanders would
provide aviation fuel and lubricants t o
squadrons operating from their strips ;
all technical aviation supplies were to
be requisitioned through ComNABS ,
Okinawa.
Service units organic to the AAF
fighter and bombardment groups woul d
support the flying squadrons of each . All
supplies other than the technical items
peculiar to AAF planes would be requisitioned from sources designated by the
Island Commander. Until an Air Servic e
Command Depot was established on Okinawa, the one at Guam would supply th e
remainder.
BASE DEVELOPMENT AND
MILITARY GOVERNMENT
PLANNING 3 5
A second logistic mission given to
ICEBERG, separate yet related to the
assault effort, was the immediate development of Okinawa as an advanced
air and fleet base . In order to support all
of the aircraft assigned to the invasion,
eight airfields and one seaplane base
were to be built almost immediately
and during the later phases of the operation this number would be increased .
Also, two ports were to be developed—
one, Nakagusuku Wan, by the Navy an d
the other, Naha harbor, by the Army.
Since Okinawa was to serve merely as a
staging base for final operations agains t
Japan, it was not contemplated that th e
installations on the island were to b e
of permanent construction . Ie Shima
was included in the base developmen t
program as the island was to hold four
airfields and to garrison ground and
antiaircraft artillery defense troops .
Base development would proceed right
on the heels of the assault troops as two
of Okinawa's airfields were to be seized ,
improved, and made operational by L
plus 5, while two more fields were to be
available by L plus 20. The preparation
of Okinawa as a mounting and stagin g
point was to be undertaken concurrently .
First priority was given the early development and activation of airfields ;
next in order of importance was the
construction of bulk fuel storage facilities ; and the third most important mat35 Unless otherwise noted the material in this
section is derived from : ICEBERG Study ;
USAFMidPac G—5 Hist ; War Reports ; Tenth
Army AR; IsCom OPlan No. 1 ; IsCom AR.
76 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
ter was the development of waterfront
installations. Reflecting the urgency of
these tasks, every effort was made to
schedule the shipments of supplies required to support base improvement so
that they would arrive at the island
when they were needed . Accordingly,
garrison troops and the materials whic h
they were to employ were to arrive i n
17 successive echelons. The timing of
their arrival was governed not only b y
the preplanned work schedule but also
by the projected unloading capacity of
the captured beaches.
To establish this schedule, a series of
echelonment conferences were held
between the staffs of the Tenth Army
and the different type commanders wh o
were furnishing troops for the operation. In any large amphibious operation ,
it is neither possible nor feasible, because of shipping limitations, to transport to the target in the assault convoy
both those troops required to undertake
the campaign to its end and the troops,
equipment, and supplies required to develop the captured base. Even if all required shipping had been made availabl e
for an operation of the size of Okinawa,
it would have been patently undesirabl e
to schedule the simultaneous arrival a t
the target of both assault and . garrison
troops. Until the assault forces ha d
landed, unloaded their shipping, and
gained enough room on the beaches fo r
the landing of the garrison elements and
equipment, the shipping in which garrison troops were embarked would have
had to lie off Okinawa, where it would
have been vulnerable to enemy submarines and aircraft. For these reasons, it
was imperative that echelonment plans
covering the movement of thousands of
assault, service, and construction troops
had to be precise.
In addition to its other functions,
Island Command was also to establish a
military government on Okinawa . Since
this was to be the first Pacific operation in
which large numbers of enemy civilian s
would be encountered by combat troops,
it was expected that the island would
serve as a valuable testing ground of
civil affairs and military government
procedures which would be applied
later when Japan itself was occupied .
In 1943, the JCS gave the Navy basi c
responsibility for establishing military
government on certain outlying islands
of the Japanese Empire, once they had
been captured. Included in this group
were the Ryukyus. Because the Tenth
Army would be in overall control of th e
Okinawa land campaign, Admira l
Nimitz believed that General Buckner
should be responsible for military government on the island. Accordingly, once
the War Department concurred in this
transfer of authority, CinCPOA wa s
able to get the 1943 JCS order reversed .
Because of its European commitments,
the Army was unable to furnish all of
the civil affairs personnel needed t o
round out the entire Tenth Army military government component. Therefore,
the Navy supplied Brigadier Genera l
William E. Crist's command with naval
officer and enlisted personnel so that
Military Government would have well -
balanced teams.
Direct naval participation in militar y
government planning for Okinawa began in July 1944, when work was begun
in New York City by the research staff
of the Chief of Naval Operations' military government section. The pooled
PROJECT ICEBERG 77
efforts of the staff resulted in the Civil
Affairs Handbook for the Ryukyu
Islands, a publication which proved to b e
of inestimable value to Tenth Army civil
affairs administrators during both th e
ICEBERG planning phase and the rehabilitation period after Okinawa had bee n
secured.
3 6
The ICEBERG joint staff study originally anticipated that, within the Okinawan population to come under Tenth
Army control, a small element would be
"antipathetic" and would have to be
"placed under detainment pending
screening and probable internment." No
figures were available to determine ho w
many mainland Japanese civilians on
Okinawa might possibly be captured ,
but preparations had to be made for the
construction of an internment camp
whose facilities were flexible enough to
provide for upwards of 10,000 island
natives and Japanese civilian internees.
It was expected that by L plus 40 thi s
number would skyrocket to an approximate total of 306,000 captured civilians,
whose food, clothing, and housing woul d
have to come from captured stocks of
salvagable material, since there was n o
room aboard assault ships for supplie s
of this nature . By the time ICEBER G
had reached the garrison phase, 12 military government camps were to be
in operation, each unit staffe d
and equipped to handle 2,500—10,000
civilians.
a9 Deputy Commander for MilGovt ltr to
ComNOB, Okinawa, and Chief MilGovt Officer,
Ryukyus, dtd 1Ju145, Subj : Rpt of MilGovt
Activities for Period from 1Apr45 to 1Ju146 ,
hereafter MilGovt AR.
Assigned to General Crist's jointly
staffed military government section
were such varied Army and Navy unit s
as a military police battalion, a truck
company, 20 Navy dispensaries, and 6
Navy hospital units. In addition to thes e
and some purely administrative elements, 350 officer and 890 enlisted civil
affairs personnel were organized int o
four types of teams, each of which ha d
been tailored for specific functions. One
of the teams was assigned to each of th e
assault divisions and, after landing, was
to conduct preliminary reconnaissanc e
missions relating to military government as the attack advanced . Teams in
another group, attached to the two corp s
and all divisions also, were to take
charge of civil affairs behind the front
lines as civilians were encountered by
the combat forces. A third type of team
was made up of refugee camp administrators, while in the fourth category
there were six teams, each of which wa s
to take charge of one of the six military
government districts into which Okinawa was to be divided .
The Chief Military Government Officer was to be directly subordinate to the
Island Commander and would function
as his deputy. The importance of this
close relationship and the emphasis
placed on intensive civil affairs plannin g
was justified later during the campaign,
when, by 30 April, there were approximately 125,000 civilians under militar y
government jurisdiction on Okinawa .
This figure climbed steadily following
this date, reached 147,829 by 31 May,
172,670 by 15 June, and totaled 261,11 5
on 30 June. 3 7
34 Tenth Army AR, chap 11, sec XXVII, p . 4.
78 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
INTELLIGENCE PLANNING 3 8
In October 1944, the statement that
"information as to enemy defensive installations on Okinawa Jima is
meager," 39 was indisputable. Despit e
the early lack of information concernin g
the island, the various intelligence gathering and processing agencies in the
Pacific, as well as those in the United
States, began to sift through availabl e
material and soon were able to clarif y
the enemy situation for ICEBER G
forces. In keeping with the establishe d
principle of coordinated planning, th e
corporate activities of all intelligence
agencies in the various Pacific commands quickly resulted in the productio n
of urgently needed basic intelligence .
Currently valid military information
of the Japanese situation was difficul t
to obtain because of the location of Okinawa within the Empire's well-protected, strategic, inner defense line.
For the most part, captured documents,
interrogations of prisoners as well as o f
former island inhabitants, and old Japanese publications provided the basis
for the intelligence estimates initiall y
issued. 40 In addition, the Navy was abl e
to make use of both captured and previously available hydrographic charts
39 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : ICEBERG Study ;
CTF 51 OPlan A1—45 ; CTF 51 AR ; Tenth
Army TntvOPlan 1—45 ; Tenth Army AR ;
ILIAC OPlan 1—45 ; ILIAC AR ; 1st MarDiv
OPlan 1—45 ; 1st MarDiv SAR; 6th MarDi v
SAR, PhI&II.
'B ICEBERG Study, App A (Enemy Strength
and Capabilities), p . 19.
40 Admiral Turner's intelligence staff discovered the existence in the United States of
an American civilian who, having spent many
years in Japan and Okinawa, was able to
for navigational studies of the waters
surrounding Okinawa.
For a terrain study, a determination
of the location and nature of enemy defenses, and an estimate of enemy
strength, most of the data at hand was
inadequate and an aerial photographi c
mission over the target had to be lai d
on. In conjunction with other information of the enemy received right up to
L-Day, the thorough interpretation an d
evaluation of these photographs enable d
Tenth Army to issue detailed intelligence studies which contained an ac -
curate estimate of the Japanese situation.
Aerial photos were required also fo r
use in the production of a map of the
target. It was difficult to obtain adequate photographic coverage at first because of the distance of Okinawa from
the closest Allied air base, some 1,20 0
nautical miles. This factor limited the
conduct of such missions to either carrier aircraft, whose ships could carry
them close to the target, or B-29s.
Other obstacles to the amassing of a
complete intelligence picture of Okinawa were the notoriously poor weathe r
over the target, the vastness of the lan d
mass to be photographed, and the
schedule of carrier strikes against th e
target—few of which were timed to
coincide with immediate Tenth Army
intelligence requirements.
On 29 September 1944, the first ICE -
BERG photographic mission was flown
by B-29s. While they covered all of
Okinawa, and the outlying islands to a
degree, the results of this flight were
divulge much valuable information . "He worke d
with this section and later worked with both
the Army and the Navy at the objective ." CTF
51 AR, pt V, sec A, p. 1 .
PROJECT ICEBERG 79
limited by clouds which obscured abou t
half of the area photographed, mainly
the northern portion of the major
island . Because of this inadequate photo
coverage, the first map produced and
distributed had many blank portions in
which there was little or no topographi c
detailing. Modifications of this first ma p
were made later in the campaign, when
captured Japanese maps provided mor e
thorough contouring information.
During the first fast-carrier strikes
on Okinawa Gunto of 10 October 1944,
large scale vertical and oblique aeria l
photographs were acquired, giving 90
percent coverage of the area . From 29
September 1944 to 28 March 1945, a
total of 224 photo-reconnaissance
sorties were flown over the target. Information gained from these photographs was collated and analyzed, an d
the resultant intelligence summaries
were distributed to Tenth Army units .
In the week preceding L-Day, escort
carrier-based photographic aircraft
flew daily missions over the island .
Careful interpretation of the photos
thus obtained permitted bomb damage
assessments and, at the same time, comparison of these photos with ones take n
earlier enabled the interpreters to locate
many enemy installations previously
concealed by effective camouflage . From
a close study of successive sorties, it wa s
possible to determine each displacement
of the enemy's defensive positions, to
hazard guesses of his relative strength ,
and to compile a preliminary target information list for distribution to artillery units. 4 1
41 IIIAC Artillery Action Report, Phase I,
Nansei Shoto, lApr-30Jun45, dtd 25Ju145, p . 7,
hereafter IIIAC Arty AR.
After L-Day and while the fighting
was still in progress, the island was completely rephotographed, the results o f
which enabled a more accurate map to
be printed and distributed . 42 A scale of
1 :25,000 was used for the basic map
originally issued from which maps o f
the initial zones of action, scaled at
1 :10,000., were produced for the use of
the lower echelon assault units. At the
same time, smaller scale maps were re -
produced for use as road maps in traffic
control planning.
The Tenth Army made rubber relief
maps on a scale of 1 :10,000, which wer e
issued to General Geiger's troops i n
sufficient quantity to permit distribution down to and including assault battalions. The mapping sections of IIIAC,
and the 1st and 6th Marine Division s
worked together to produce plastic ter -
rain models of the corps zone of action .
Made to a scale of 1 :5,000 and constructed with a 2 :1 vertical exaggeration, these models facilitated the briefing of commanders and their troops for
the prospective operation . Wholesale
distribution of these relief models wa s
made soon after the troops embarked
for the target, at which time some 60 0
copies of a 1 :5,000 map of the landin g
beaches, specially prepared by the 1st
42 " . . . the absence of an adequate one over
twenty five thousand map during the planning
phase, and even during the early phases of the
operation, served greatly in influencing everything the landing force did. It was often a
critical impediment. As a matter of fact, the
area in which the 6th Division operated a s
early as L-plus 4 had large blank segments on
the map." CMC [Gen. Lemuel C. Shepherd ,
Jr.] Memo to G-3, dtd 18Jan55, hereafte r
Shepherd memo I.
80 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Marine Division., were issued to its assault units.
To supplement aerial photographs,
the USS Swordfish, a specially equippe d
submarine, was dispatched to Okinawa
from Pearl Harbor on 22 Decembe r
1944 with the mission of photographing
Okinawa's beaches and Japanese defensive installations on the island coasts .
After making her last known radi o
transmission on 3 January 1945, th e
submarine was never heard from agai n
and was reported missing. As a result,
no beach photographs were taken before L-Day for, as succinctly stated in
the TF 51 AR, "no information from
submarine reconnaissance was avail -
able." 4 3
In October 1944, enemy strength on
Okinawa was set at 48,600 . It was estimated that two well-trained and experienced infantry divisions, and a tank
regiment, comprised the major defense
force on the island . At this time, it was
recognized that an additional threat to
the landings was posed by the size of
the civilian population located in southern Okinawa. This manpower potential
of more than 300,000 individuals woul d
swell the enemy strength figure if they
were used to form a home guard or
militia, or to conduct guerrilla activities. In January 1945, the Tenth Army
estimate assumed that the Japanese
reinforcement capability could increase
the regular force figure to 66,000 by
L-Day, at which time enemy defens e
forces on Okinawa would be two and a
half infantry divisions. If the enemy
'g Theodore Roscoe, United States Submarine
Operations in World War II (Annapolis :
United States Naval Institute, 1949), pp.
446—447 ; CTF 51 AR, pt V, sec A, p . 1.
exerted his maximum reinforcement
capability, he could then oppose the
landing with four infantry divisions
constituting the principal combat elements of the defense . Total Japanese
strength would then be 87,000 men .
All possible Japanese courses of
action were considered, and troop dispositions for each course were analyzed in light of what was known o f
current Japanese tactical doctrine and
its evolution to date. All indications
pointed to the fact that the enemy woul d
most likely organize the southern third
of Okinawa for a defense in dept h
while the bulk of his troops were withheld as a mobile reserve . This course of
action would present a potentially mor e
dangerous situation to the landing forc e
than would the more commonly experienced alternative of a determined defense of the beaches.
An interpretation of aerial photographs in February revealed that the
enemy force on Okinawa comprised two
infantry divisions and an independent
mixed brigade, service and support
troop reinforcements for the infantry,
all totaling an estimated 56,000–58,000
men. It also appeared that, while th e
far northern sector was defended by a
single battalion only, the main forc e
was disposed in the south in the projected XXIV Corps area. . In the III
Amphibious Corps zone of action, it was
estimated that two infantry regiment s
defended . Conceivably, these six or
seven thousand men could be reinforced
by local auxiliaries.
While the small garrison in the north
was given the capability of mounting
counterattacks against the invader left
flank, it was expected that the most
PROJECT ICEBERG 81
violent enemy reaction would come fro m
the heavily defended south, on the
XXIV Corps' right flank, where th e
Japanese mobile reserve would be maintained in considerable strength. It was
anticipated that, as soon as the Japanese had appraised the landing force's
dispositions, a counteroffensive in force
would be mounted by the enemy reserve.
The estimate of Japanese strength
was again revised in mid-February, this
time downwards to 37,500—39,500, whe n
information was received that a full
division had been withdrawn from Okinawa. In view of this reduction, and
supplemented by indications that th e
enemy was concentrating in the Naka ,
gusuku Bay area, it was presumed that
the two Marine divisions would be op -
posed in their zones by no more than
one infantry regiment deployed in position, and that the total number of Japanese troops in the overall sector woul d
be more than 10,000 .
This numbers guessing game continued when, a month later, the estimate of Japanese defense forces was
revised upwards to 64,000 . It appeared
that the enemy had been able to reinforce the garrison with an understrength infantry division as well a s
with some miscellaneous units of unknown origin, in all about 20,000 men.
It was believed that an additional force
of 4,000—6,000 men had arrived in
March, having been lifted by shippin g
which successfully evaded the Allie d
blockade. The Tenth Army assume d
that, if the March enemy reinforcements were the advance elements o f
another division, it was reasonable to
assume further that by 1 April the landing force would be opposed by at least
75,000 men. In the week preceding
L-Day, while the assault elements sortie d
for the target, still another estimate o f
enemy strength in the IIIAC zone wa s
issued. In this supplementary revision.,
it was stated that the principal Japanese opposition now would come fro m
two reinforced infantry regiments wit h
a strength of 16,000 men .
Air and naval capabilities assigne d
to the Japanese remained relatively unchanged all during the planning phase s
of ICEBERG. At all times it was expected that the enemy would be capable
of mounting heavy and repeated air
attacks against invasion shipping . It
was expected that this vigorous air
effort would include continued employment and intensification of the suicide
bombing tactics which first had appeared
during the invasion of Leyte in October
1944. The Japanese were credited with
an air strength of approximately 3,00 0
planes which were based within range
and capable of blunting the Okinaw a
landing. Along with this air capability,
the enemy was believed able to moun t
an airborne counterattack, for "as air
action is practically the only assistanc e
he can give the Okinawa garrison from
outside [the island], he may expend
considerable aircraft and endeavor t o
land several thousand troops within ou r
beachhead." 4 4
It was known that the Japanese had
suicide motor torpedo boat units at Okinawa and it was assumed that midge t
submarines were based there also.
Added to the possible tactical employment of these suicide organizations wa s
the potential use of suicide swimmers
"Tenth Army TntvOPlan 1-45, anx 3, se c
V, p. 14.
82 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
whose mission was also disruption o f
the invasion fleet at anchor off the objective. Although the Japanese Nav y
was a mere shadow of its former self ,
it still retained operational forces
strong enough to pose a threat to th e
landing's success. For that reason, it
was deemed necessary to maintain a
strong surface cover at the objective .
While the southern part of Okinawa
was ideally suited for the tactical use of
tanks, the enemy was not given an
armored capability . This was because
the relation of estimated tank strength
to the total estimated garrison strength
was too low, and it was not felt that thi s
support arm would offer any great
opposition.
Three months after Admiral Nimitz
had received the JCS directive for Okinawa's invasion, General Buckne r
issued the initial operation order setting the ICEBERG juggernaut's wheels
into motion. During the course of this
planning period., each Tenth Army general and special staff section prepare d
that portion of the operation order fo r
which it was responsible while maintaining liaison with the subordinat e
units which were preparing to put
words into action. Although most of the
ICEBERG assault, support, and garrison forces did not issue their own operation orders until January 1945, warning orders had already alerted them to
the impending invasion.
CHAPTER 3
Assault Preparations
TRAINING AND REHEARSALS '
The Pacific-wide dispersion of troop s
and shipping assigned to ICEBERG
prevented the Tenth Army from conducting either training or rehearsals as
a cohesive unit. Because of the vast distances separating General Buckner and
his corps and division commanders, the
latter were invested with the responsibility for training their respective
organizations along the lines of Tenth
Army directives. With these orders as a
guide, all Marine units committed to the
operation were trained under the supervision of FMFPac .
Assault preparations of ICEBER G
Army divisions were hindered by the
limited time available for their rehabilitation, reorganization, and training.
1 Unless otherwise noted, the material in this
section is derived from : CTF 51 AR; Tenth
Army AR ; TAF AR; XXIV Corps AR,
Ryukyus, lApr-30Jun45, n.d., hereafter XXIV
Corps AR ; ILIAC AR ; ILIAC Arty AR ; IsCom
AR ; MilGovt AR ; 1st MarDiv SAR ; 2 d
MarDiv AR, Phase I, Nansei Shoto, dt d
15Apr45, hereafter 2d MarDiv AR ; 6th MarDiv
SAR, Ph I & II; 7th InfDiv OpRpt, Ryukyu s
Campaign, dtd 30Ju145, hereafter 7th Inf Div
OpRpt; 27th InfDiv OpRpt, Phase I, Nanse i
Shoto, 1 Jan-30Jun45, dtd 19Ju145, hereafte r
27th InfDiv OpRpt; 77th InfDiv OpRpt, Phas e
I (in 3 parts—Kerama Retto, Keise Shima ;
Ie Shima ; Okinawa), n.d., hereafter 77th
InfDiv OpRpt and appropriate part; 96th
InfDiv AR, Ryukyus Campaign, dtd 28Ju145,
hereafter 96th InfDiv AR.
310-224 0 - 69 - 7
This was especially true in the case of
XXIV Corps units already in combat i n
the Philippines. Many of the garrison
and service units which were to be
attached to the various assault forces
were also handicapped by the time factor because they, too, were either fighting or heavily committed in support o f
operations in the Philippines. In order
that Tenth Army staff planners coul d
better evaluate the combat readiness of
all organizations within the command ,
each of General Buckner's commanders
submitted a monthly training status report to ICEBERG headquarters on
Oahu.`-' Since the reports lacked what an
inspection at first-hand could provide,
Buckner and some of his principal staff
officers made a series of flying trips t o
each of the corps and divisions. These
personal visits at the end of January
1945 "did much to weld the far-flun g
The voluminous training status reports
were in reality check-off lists for newly forme d
divisions. When the Marine Deputy Chief of
Staff of the Tenth Army learned that th e
IIIAC assault divisions, whose troops had
recently been in combat and were in an advanced state of training, had to submit thes e
reports, he pointed out that preparation "o f
these reports merely harassed the divisions an d
served no useful purpose." Once General
Buckner "saw the training being engaged in
by the 1st and 6th Marine Divisions . . . the
word was passed to [Brigadier General] Silverthorn to forget about the submission of the
Status Reports." Smith, Personal Narrative ,
p . 43.
83
84 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
units of the Tenth Army into a unified
whole." s
One determinant forcing the postponement of the Formosa-South Chin a
invasion in favor of the Okinawa assault
had been the shortage of service and
support troops, a shortage that stil l
existed when the Tenth Army began its
final training and rehearsal phases. 4
Many of these specialist units were
slated to reinforce corps and division s
for the assault and then to augmen t
Island Command during the initial bas e
development. Because they were too
deeply involved otherwise, often with
primary missions related to the buildu p
for the operation, the support troop s
could not train with the assault units
they were to reinforce. The time borrowed for training would seriously disrupt the mounting and staging efforts
Blakelock ltr. Of Buckner's visit to his
Marine units in the Solomons, General Geiger
wrote : "General Buckner and five of his staf
spent about three days with us the latter part
of January. You know how difficult it is to
make a very favorable impressiart in the mud
down here, especially in cleanliness of equipment; but I believe he and his staff were satisfied with what they saw. They spent a day with
each division observing training. We took them
over to the 1st Division in a PBY-5A ." MajGen
Roy S. Geiger Itr to LtGen Alexander A.
Vandegrift, dtd 2Feb45 (Vandegrift Persona l
Correspondence File, HistBr, HQMC) .
' General Oliver P. Smith recalled that in
order to obtain at least a minimum of additional service troops, the Tenth Army "had t o
comb the entire Pacific Ocean Area and resort
to considerable improvisation . For example, a
veteran tank battalion was broken up to make
Quartermaster Truck Companies. I happened
to talk to the battalion commander of this
tank battalion, who was heartbroken over th e
matter. . . ." Smith, Personal Narrative, p. 12 .
for ICEBERG. Nevertheless, support
unit commanders carried out adequate
individual weapons' qualification an d
physical conditioning programs whic h
met Tenth Army training requirements.
Although they were released to Genera l
Buckner's control only a few days before mounting for the target, a numbe r
of garrison organizations were able t o
conduct limited training with the combat outfit to which they were attached .
The major assault components of the
Tenth Army were battle-experienced for
the most part, but they needed to undertake an intensive training schedule i n
order to bring veterans and newly absorbed replacements alike to peak combat efficiency. To accomplish this task,
Army and Marine Corps units in the
South Pacific, and the 2d Marine Division on Saipan, conducted extensiv e
programs which fulfilled the training
requirements stipulated by General
Buckner's directives. General Hodge's
XXIV Corps, however, was engaged in
operations on Leyte, and his division s
were not released to Tenth Army by
General MacArthur until 10 February
1945, 5 just two months before L-Day.
After the extended period of bitter
fighting in the Philippines, however, the
combat units slated for ICEBERG wer e
understrength . General Hodge's problems were further aggravated when his
infantry divisions were required to fur5 In 1944 when the JCS approved the recommended invasion of Leyte, the XXIV Corps was
fully combat loaded, already at sea, and e n
route for the invasion of Yap. As a result of
the decision to land at Leyte, the Yap landing
was cancelled and the XXIV Corps was reassigned to General MacArthur, who ordered
it to invade Leyte on 20 October 1944 .
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 85
nish the Leyte Base Command 6 with
large working parties as soon as the
troops returned from mopping-up operations at the front. The servicing, crating, and loading of organic division
equipment siphoned off the services o f
other infantrymen as well as making i t
impossible to impose a major trainin g
program on any of the divisions.
Finally, as one command reported, th e
"deterioration of the physical an d
mental condition of combat personne l
after 110 days of continuous contact
with the enemy made it plain tha t
rigorous field training in the wet an d
muddy terrain would prove more detrimental than beneficial." '
Besides undertaking the many othe r
incidental duties preparatory to mounting for Okinawa from Leyte, some Army
units had to construct their own camp s
and make their own billeting arrangements as soon as they arrived in the
rear area from the front lines. What
little time was available to the Souther n
Landing Force before L-Day wa s
divided between training in small-unit
tactics and practice for breaching and
scaling operations, in anticipation of
the conditions to be found at Okinaw a
beaches. Because of the large influx o f
raw replacements into the divisions,
great emphasis was placed on developing the teamwork of riflemen and thei r
supporting weapons.
Of the three divisions in XXIV Corps,
the 96th was the most fortunate in that
° This logistical organization suffered fro m
a chronic shortage of service troops which
threatened the dual mission of the command
of supporting both the Luzon and Okinaw a
invasions.
7 7th Inf Div OpRpt, p. 28.
some of its new troops arrived during
mopping-up stages on Leyte . At that
time, the replacements were given a n
opportunity to take an "active part i n
combat and reconnaissance patrols,
gaining valuable battle indoctrination
through physical contact and skirmishe s
with small isolated groups of Japanese." 8
According to the Tenth Army Marin e
Deputy Chief of Staff, General Smith :
The conditions of the Army division s
on Leyte gave General Buckner considerable concern. This was not the fault of the
divisions ; they were excellent divisions.
However, they had been in action on Leyte
for three months and two of the divisions
were still engaged in active operations . The
divisions were understrength and adequate
replacements were not in sight. There wer e
[numerous men suffering from] dysenter y
and skin infections. Living conditions wer e
very bad . A considerable number of combat
troops had been diverted to Luzon and
converted into service troops. There wa s
some doubt as to whether reequipment
could be effected in time . 9
The fighting record of the XXIV
Corps on Okinawa indicates how well it
overcame great obstacles in preparing
for its ordeal. Once they had reconstituted their combat organizations,
trained their fresh replacements, and
attended to the many details incident t o
mounting for the target, the vetera n
units of this corps were able to give
good accounts of themselves against th e
enemy.
In the South Pacific and the Marianas, Tenth Army units were not as
heavily committed as the units of the
Southern Landing Force, and completed
a more comprehensive training pro -
e 96th Inf Div AR, chap V, p. 1.
° Smith, Personal Narrative, p. 47.
86 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
gram. The 27th Infantry Division, ICE -
BERG floating reserve, arrived at
Espiritu Santo in the New Hebrides
from Saipan during September and
October 1944. The division was undivided in its opinion that this base wa s
a "hellhole," unfitted for the division's
rehabilitation and training because o f
the island's torrid climate, its topography, and lush, tropical vegetation ."
Upon receipt of advance information
that it was to take part in the Okinawa
assault, the 27th instituted an accelerated combat training program which
was calculated to qualify it, by 30
January 1945, for a period of prolonge d
operations against the enemy . Launched
on 23 October, the level of the program
advanced progressively from individua l
schooling to combined company and battalion exercises and, finally, to a twoweek stretch of regimental combat team
(RCT) 11 maneuvers. During this staging period, in which 2,700 replacements
arrived and were assigned, the division
stressed training for offensive and defensive night operations.
Most Marines in IIIAC assault divisions had recently been in combat, ye t
their training programs were stringent
and comprehensive. Like all other
veteran ICEBERG forces, the Marine
divisions were confronted with the need
to obtain, integrate, and train replace10 Capt Edmund G. Love, The 27th Infantr y
Division in World War II (Washington : Infantry Journal Press, 1949), p. 521, hereafte r
Love, 27th Inf Div Hist.
11 An RCT in an amphibious operation wa s
an infantry regiment reinforced by supportin g
arms, i.e ., artillery, tanks, engineers, etc .,
which made up a balanced team for specifi c
missions and whose services were required for
initial operations ashore.
ments. Marine training overall emphasized the development of a tankinfantry-artillery team and focuse d
attention on tactical innovations such as
the use of the armored amphibian's
75mm howitzer for supplementary artillery support. While other Tenth Army
units were required to undertake amphibious training, General Geiger's
troops did not have to, since General
Buckner considered his Marine divisions eminently qualified in this aspect
of warfare.
Following the Peleliu campaign, General del Valle's 1st Marine Division had
returned to Pavuvu for rest and rehabilitation. The division was first
based on the island in April 1944,
arriving there after completion of th e
New Britain operation . At that time,
and with some difficulty, the Guadalcanal and Cape Gloucester veterans converted the overrun coconut groves int o
some semblance of a habitable cantonment. Because of its small size, Pavuv u
was not particularly suited for training
as large a unit as a division ; its terrain
limited the widespread construction of
machine gun and mortar firing ranges. 1 2
All artillery firing had to be conducte d
on Guadalcanal .
12 During the division training phase, physical conditioning hikes were made on the shor e
road which encircled only that part of th e
island occupied by the division . Both sides of
the road were used as units followed on e
another, the group on the inside track marching in a clockwise direction, while the oute r
group hiked counterclockwise—both groups
passing each other several times as the y
crowded the limited road net . At mealtime, the
unmistakable smell of New Zealand-grow n
sheep being cooked filled the air, and the
Marines, as if one, would curse, "Mutton again ,
dammit."
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 87
After its return from the Palaus, the
ranks of the 1st held some 246 officer s
and 5,600 enlisted Marines who ha d
already served overseas nearly 30
months. Within that time, the division
had made three assault landings and it
was now to make a fourth . If the division was to go ashore at full strength,
it appeared, at first, that it would b e
necessary for the veterans of Guadalcanal, Cape Gloucester, and Peleliu to
fight at Okinawa too. A potentially
serious morale problem was alleviate d
when the division received four replacement drafts by 1 January . These drafts,
plus a steady flow of individual replacements, brought officer strength to
slightly above the authorized figure
and exceeded the authorized enliste d
strength figure by more than 10 per -
cent. As a consequence, all eligible enlisted Marines were able to return t o
the States.
At the same time, an extensive leav e
program was established for officers
who, though eligible, could not be spare d
for rotation. Fifty-three of them wer e
permitted to take 30 days leave in the
United States, after which they were t o
return to Pavuvu. "In addition, six went
to Australia and one to New Zealand .
Some fifty key enlisted men [eligible
for rotation] also elected to take leave
in Australia in order that they could
continue to serve in the First Marine
Division." 13 By the time the division
embarked for Okinawa, approximately
one-third of its Marines had been in tw o
invasions, one-third had faced the
enemy once, and the remainder were
men who had seen no combat whatso -
13 1st MarDiv SAR, chap III (Personnel
Anx), pp. 2-3.
ever. The majority of the latter were
replacements who had arrived at
Pavuvu while the 1st was at Peleliu .
As soon as the training cycle of General del Valle's infantry units reached
the regimental level and outgrew
Pavuvu's facilities, each RCT was
rotated to Guadalcanal, about 65 mile s
to the southeast, for two weeks of more
intensive combined-arms training . Special emphasis was given to preparing
the division for warfare of a type and
on a scale differing in almost every respect from that which it experienced i n
the tropical jungles of Guadalcanal and
New Britain, and on the coral ridges of
equatorial Peleliu. As an integral part
of a much larger force, this division wa s
to invade, for the first time, a land mass
"which contained extensive road nets,
large inhabited areas, cities and villages, large numbers of enemy civilians ,
and types of terrain" 14 not found in the
South Pacific. Besides being schooled to
fight under the conditions anticipated at
Okinawa, the troops were trained to defend against paratroop attack and indoctrinated in the techniques of dealing
with hostile civilians.
In commenting on the personnel situation of his regiment during its trainin g
period, the former commanding office r
of the 11th Marines stated :
The heavy casualties suffered at
Peleliu, plus the rotation without immediate replacement of all officers and men
with 30 months' service in the Pacific after
that battle, posed a severe problem. Only
one battalion commander remained of the
four who went to Peleliu. There were onl y
eight field officers in the regiment including myself and the [naval gunfire] officer.
Fourteen captains with 24 months' Pacifi c
14 1st MarDiv SAR, chap IV, p . 1.
88 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
service were allowed a month's leave plu s
travel time in the United States, and the y
left Pavuvu at the end of November and
were not available for the training
maneuver at first. I recall that the 4th
Battalion (LtCol L. F . Chapman, Jr.) had
only 18 officers present including himself.
He had no captains whatever. The other
battalions and [regimental headquarters ]
were in very similar shape . The 3d Battalion had to be completely reorganized du e
to heavy casualties on Peleliu and was th e
only one with two field [grade] officers.
But it had only about 20 officers of al l
ranks present. 1 5
General Shepherd's 6th Marine Division was activated on Guadalcanal in
September 1944, and was formed essentially around the 1st Provisional Marin e
Brigade. This unit had taken part in the
Guam invasion and had been with -
drawn from that island late in August.
The infantry components of this new
division were, with a few exceptions,
veterans of the Pacific fighting . The 4th
Marines was made up of the disbanded
Marine raider battalions, whose troop s
had fought on Guadalcanal, New
Georgia, and Bougainville ; the infantry
regiment as a whole had landed o n
Emirau and Guam. The 22d Marines
had participated in the Eniwetok and
Guam campaigns, and the 1st Battalion,
29th Marines had augmented the 2 d
Marine Division for the Saipan assault.
After its relief on Saipan, 1/29 was sen t
to Guadalcanal to await the arrival from
the United States of its two sister battalions, and eventual assignment to the
6th Division.
At the time of the 6th Marine Division activation, the division was some
1,800 men understrength and, as was
15 MajGen Wilburt S . Brown ltr to CMC, dt d
10Oct54, hereafter Brown ltr.
the case with other IIIAC units, in very
few instances did the classification o f
the replacements received by Genera l
Shepherd correspond to his actual
needs. Paralleling other instances,
where the composition of stateside -
formed replacement drafts did not
satisfy critical shortages in specific specialist fields, the 15th Marines wa s
assigned and forced to retrain antiaircraft artillerymen from disbanded defense battalions whose previous experience and training was not considere d
the same as that needed by field artillerymen.
Most of the men in the 6th Divisio n
had fought in at least one campaign ,
while others were Pacific combat veterans who were now beginning a secon d
tour of overseas duty. The division was
based on Guadalcanal, where kuna i
grass and steaming tropical jungle provided an excellent environment in which
General Shepherd's men could fulfill a
rugged training schedule . The program
began on 1 October and proceeded from
small-unit exercises through large-scal e
combined-arms problems employing battalion landing teams (BLTs) 16 and
RCTs; all training culminated in an
eight-day division exercise in January
1945. Anticipating how the division wa s
to be employed on Okinawa, General
Shepherd emphasized the execution of
large-unit maneuvers, swift movement,
and rapid troop deployment .
The IIIAC Artillery faced the same
replacement retraining problems that
plagued the 15th Marines. When the 6th
155mm Howitzer Battalion and th e
10 The BLT was reinforced for the assault i n
a manner similar to that of an RCT, but on a
lesser scale.
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 89
Headquarters Battery, 2d Provisional
Field Artillery Group, were formed in
October and November 1944, their
cadres were withdrawn from existin g
units of corps artillery . The latter was
further drained when 500 combat veterans, mostly valuable noncommissioned officers, were rotated home in
November. There were few experience d
artillerymen in the group replacing
them.
At the same time that rehearsals
were being conducted for the coming
operations, Brigadier General David I.
Nimmer's Corps Artillery battalions
were forced to conduct training sessions
(retraining classes in the case of rada r
technicians and antiaircraft artillerymen coming from disbanded defense
battalions) in order to ensure that all
firing battery personnel would be completely familiar with the weapons to
which they were newly assigned .
Another matter adversely affecting th e
artillery training program was the de -
lay, until 15 November and 10 December respectively, in the return of the 3 d
155mm Howitzer and the 8th 155mm
Gun Battalions from the Palaus operation. General Nimmer's organizational
and personnel problems were complicated further by the fact that approximately 10 percent of his unit strength
joined after active training ended in
February, while 78 communicators and
92 field artillerymen did not join unti l
after Corps Artillery had embarked for
Okinawa.
VMO-7, the Marine observation
squadron assigned to Corps Artillery,
did not arrive before General Nimmer's
units mounted out, but joined them later
at the target. Three days before embarkation, the commanding officer of
the 2d Provisional Field Artillery
Group joined . Despite these hitches t o
IIIAC Corps Artillery pre-combat preparations, General Nimmer considered
all of his embarked artillery units
ready, although "both individual and
unit proficiency were not up to th e
standards that could have been obtaine d
under more favorable circumstances." 1 4
As soon as General Geiger's staff began planning for the Marine Corps rol e
in ICEBERG, the commanders of th e
IIIAC Corps Artillery and the 11th an d
15th Marines established liaison with
one another in order to coordinate their
unit training programs. These senior
Marine artillery officers "resolved that
in this operation we would take advantage of all previous experience, good
and bad, and give a superior performance. Accordingly, great care was given
to . . . the ability to rapidly mass fires
of all available guns at any critica l
point." 1 8
Artillery training was directed toward attaining this capability . General
Nimmer's staff devised and wrote th e
standard operating procedures to be
used by all Marine artillery units assigned to ICEBERG. These procedures
established the techniques to be used for
requesting and the subsequent deliver y
of reinforcing fires. During the training
period, firing batteries constantly put
the new doctrine into practice.
With the exception of the 12th
Marines, the 2d Marine Division artillery regiment, all other Marine artillery
units in the Tenth Army conducted a
" IIIAC Arty AR, p . 10.
' 8 Col Frederick P. Henderson ltr to CMC,
dtd 11Mar55, hereafter Henderson ltr.
90 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
combined problem on Guadalcanal, 11 –
13 January. A majority of the firin g
missions were spotted by aerial observers. Conditions anticipated on. Okinawa were simulated as closely as possible, although the large military
population and the consequent profusion of various installations on
Guadalcanal necessarily limited the siz e
of the artillery ranges available for the
big guns. By the end of the combine d
problem, when a firing mission was
called in, the Marines "were able to
have all artillery present, laid and ready
to fire in an average of five minute s
from the time it was reported." 1 9
General Watson's 2d Marine Division,
reserve for IIIAC and its third major
element, was in garrison on Saipa n
where a division-wide training program
was effectively integrated with mopping-up operations against enemy
forces remaining at large on the island .
More than 8,000 Marine replacements
received valuable on-the-job experience
routing Japanese holdouts during th e
first months of the division trainin g
program which began 15 September.
Saipan's rapid build-up as a supply
center and an air base restricted the
training efforts of the division, how -
ever, and maneuver room and impact
areas were soon at a premium.
10 Henderson ltr. After the 11th Marines
arrived on Guadalcanal, 15 December 1944, i t
joined the 15th Marines to train with IIIA C
Artillery for seven straight weeks with onl y
one break, Christmas Day. In this joint training effort, great stress was placed on suc h
artillery tactics as proper conduct of fire, with
the battalions registering, firing missions, and
displacing several times a day "to overcome
the improvised jungle methods heretofore use d
by the division in previous campaigns." Brown
ltr.
In the course of his inspection trip t o
Tenth Army units, General Buckne r
visited the 2d Marine Division . On the
morning of 3 February, he trooped th e
line of the 8th Marines and then inspected the regimental quarters an d
galleys. It seemed to General Smith tha t
the men of the 2d Division looked ver y
fit, and that they had made a tremendous impression on the Tenth Army
commander. Buckner was particularl y
impressed with the battalion commanders, and told his deputy chief o f
staff that "he had never before had th e
privilege of meeting such an alert
group. . . ." 2 0
A lack of suitable beaches on Saipan
confined final division rehearsals to
simulated landings only. Because of the
indefinite nature of its employment once
it had made the feint landings on L-Day
and L plus 1, the 2d Division had to
select an arbitrary landing scheme o f
two RCTs abreast for the rehearsal
pattern. Bad weather prevented LVT
launchings on two days, neither air no r
naval gunfire support was available ,
and, finally, on 19 March—the last day
of the exercises—only the naval portion of TG 51 .2 (Demonstration Group )
was able to participate in the demonstration rehearsal.
On Espiritu Santo, the Tenth Army' s
other relatively isolated unit—the 27th
Infantry Division—conducted rehearsals from 20 to 25 March while its transport squadron was being loaded. This
division was in the same position a s
General Watson's in that it faced a pro -
fusion of potential missions. The rehearsals of both reserve divisions were
20 Smith, Personal Narrative, p. 52.
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 9 1
based, therefore, on a number of hypothetical landing assignments .
Satisfactory practice landings were
made by all of the other Tenth Army
asault divisions. IIIAC rehearsals took
place off the Cape Esperance-Doma
Cove beaches on Guadalcanal from 2
through 7 March . Although reefs do
not exist here, a transfer line was simulated 200 yards from the shore in a n
attempt to duplicate actual landin g
conditions in the corps zone on Okinawa .
During the six days of rehearsals, Rea r
Admiral Reifsnider's staff officers made
certain that assault wave control wa s
emphasized and that the training o f
communications elements was intensified at all command levels.
Because naval gunfire and air-support
units assigned to ICEBERG were committed elsewhere at this time, the toke n
prelanding bombardment furnished by
vessels in the area, and the air support
supplied by F6Fs (Hellcats) and TBMs
(Avengers), flying in from Henderso n
Field and nearby carriers, only approximated the tremendous volume of fire t o
be laid on the Hagushi beaches. Practice landings were made by IIIAC units
on 3 March, followed the next day by a
critique aboard the TF 53 flagship, US S
Panamint. Other preliminary landings
on the 5th preceded the landing of th e
entire IIIAC assault echelon on 6
March. Corps and division comman d
posts were set up ashore, a primary
communications net was established,
and some equipment was unloaded. On
7 March, the reserve regiments—th e
1st Marines for the 1st Division and
the 29th Marines for the IIIAC—
climbed down the nets into invasion
craft, which were formed into boat
waves, and then landed on the beaches.
General Geiger's corps artillery units
did not participate in these final rehearsal exercises except to land battalion, corps, and group headquarters
reconnaissance parties. The shortage of
time prevented the landing of any of
the artillery pieces which were to go
ashore at the target.
Nearly 3,000 miles away from
Guadalcanal, in the Philippines, assault
elements of XXIV Corps conducted rehearsals in Leyte Gulf from the 15th to
the 19th of March under the watchful
eyes of Admiral Hall and his attack
force staff officers. Because the missions
assigned XXIV Corps divisions varie d
so widely, the nature and conduct o f
their rehearsals tended to reflect this
variance.
The 77th Infantry Division was to
make the initial ICEBERG assault, the
landing on Kerama Retto. In order to
familiarize the troops with condition s
at their impending target, practice
landings were made in southeaster n
Leyte's Hinunangan Bay on islands that
closely resembled some of those in the
Keramas. For two days, 14 and 15
March, adverse weather conditions and
heavy swells prevented any landings a t
all, but adherence to any firm rehearsa l
schedule was not considered necessary
since the mission of the 77th involve d
several landings independent of each
other.
Poor weather on the 15th forced the
cancellation of a planned rehearsal fo r
the Ie Shima invasion, while only the
division reserve (307th Infantry) mad e
any practice landings on the 16th .
Although General Bruce was satisfied
with the rehearsals since "all elements
92 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
scheduled for a specific mission satisfactorily executed a close approximatio n
of their mission," 21 Admiral Kiland
was not so confident. The Western
Islands Attack Group Commander felt
that "considering the complexity of the
operation and the relative inexperience
of naval personnel involved, the curtailment of these exercises by weather conditions made the training provide d
entirely inadequate ." 2 2
On 16 March, the 7th and 96th Divisions landed under perfect weather conditions and on the 18th held unit
critiques, in which certain basic discrepancies and difficulties discovered i n
the first exercise were ironed out . The
following day, the two divisions lande d
again. A high-level critique was held on
the 21st for the major Army and Nav y
commanders on Admiral Hall's flagship ,
USS Teton. Also present were Admiral
Turner and General Buckner. At this
time, all of the XXIV Corps rehearsals
were evaluated, and efforts were made
to ensure that the actual landing woul d
be better coordinated.
As the normal duties of most of the
flying squadrons assigned to TAF constituted their combat training, and since
they would not begin operations at
Okinawa until after the landing, whe n
the airfields were ready, they were not
required to conduct rehearsals for ICEBERG. TAF ground personnel scheduled to travel to the target with the
assault echelon, participated in the
landing rehearsals that were held at
=' 77th Inf Div OpRpt, Kerama Retto, Keise
Shima, p. 20.
== CTG 51 .5 AR, Capture of Okinawa Gunto ,
Phases 1 and 2, 9Mar-2Apr45, dtd 26May45 ,
chap II, p. 2, hereafter CTG 51 .1 AR.
Guadalcanal and Leyte. Their troop
training, for the most part, was con -
ducted aboard ship en route to the staging areas, and consisted of familiarization lectures about the enemy, his
tactics, and his equipment.
Like the other Okinawa-bound Tenth
Army units mounting from Pearl
Harbor., Island Command troops con -
ducted individual and unit training
programs which consisted of specialist
as well as combat subjects. The Island
Command assault echelon was composed chiefly of headquarters personnel who were to initiate the base development plan as soon as practicable afte r
the landing. Within this echelon also
were shore party, ordnance, ammunition,
supply, signal, quartermaster, truck,
and water transportation units, whos e
support services would be required immediately after the initial assault.
At Fort Ord, California, officers to
staff military government teams began
assembling in late December 1944 . A
number of these officers had already received approximately three months of
military government training at eithe r
Princeton or Columbia Universities. In
California and at the staging area s
where they joined the assault forces,
these Army and Navy officers received
instructions pertinent to the ICEBERG
military government plan . Many in the
Navy enlisted component in the military government section had never received any specialized civil affairs training before they arrived at Fort Ord,
where they were assembled just in time
to embark with the teams to which the y
were assigned. 2 "
MilGovt AR, p. 3 .
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 9 3
By 1945, the roll-up of enemy positions in the Pacific had progressed t o
the point where some Tenth Army units
were able to mount and stage on th e
threshold of Japan. XXIV Corps prepared for Okinawa in the Leyte Gulf
area, only 1,000 miles from the Ryukyus, while in the Marianas, just slightl y
farther away from the target, other
ICEBERG forces made ready for the
attack. Northern Attack Force units,
however, had a considerably longer
journey to the Ryukyus as they prepared in the Solomons.
MOUNTING AND STAGING THE
ASSAULT 2 4
Each attack force of the Joint Expeditionary Force was organized differently for loading, movement, and unloading at the target. The nine transport
divisions in the three transrons o f
Admiral Hall's Southern Attack Forc e
were reorganized and expanded to number 11 transport divisions (transdivs) .
Assigned to these two additional transdivs were those ships slated to lift
XXIV Corps troops at Leyte and those
which were to load Tenth Army an d
Island Command forces waiting o n
Oahu. The Northern Attack Force ,
which was to carry IIIAC troops, was
not so augmented . General Geiger wa s
so impressed with how well the reorganization of Admiral Hall's transport
force had eased movement control and
24 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : CTF 51 AR ;
Tenth Army AR ; TAF AR ; IIIAC AR; XXIV
Corps AR ; 1st MarDiv SAR ; 2d MarDiv AR ;
6th, MarDiv SAR ; 7th InfDiv OpRpt ; 27th
InfDiv OpRpt; 77th InfDiv OpRpt, Kerama
Retto, Keise Shima ; 96th InfDiv AR.
increased the efficiency of loading and
unloading operations, that he requested
the formation of a similar corps ship -
ping group for future IIIAC operations. 2 5
The commanding generals of the 1st
and 6th Marine Divisions were made
responsible for the loading and embarkation of their respective organi c
and attached units, while IIIAC itself
supervised the loading of corps troops.
In addition, General Geiger was responsible for embarking Marine Air Group
33 (MAG–33) of TAF, which was base d
on Espiritu Santo., 555 miles southeast
of Guadalcanal.
Although some Northern Attac k
Force vessels were partially combat -
loaded before the rehearsal period, al l
required additional time off the Guadalcanal, Banika, and Pavuvu beaches t o
take on vital cargo and to top-off wate r
and fuel tanks. The Northern Tractor
Flotilla was the first increment of TF 53
to leave the Solomons for the stagin g
area at Ulithi. Departing on 12 March,
the holds and above decks of the landin g
ships in the convoy were solidly packed
with amphibious vehicles, tanks, artillery, and various other combat gear.
For this invasion, IIIAC wanted to
avoid subjecting assault troops to th e
crowded conditions and debilitating
effects of prolonged confinement aboard
LSTs and LSMs.
While APAs were hardly luxurious,
their accommodations were far better
than those of the landing ships. To ease
the first leg of the journey to Okinawa ,
=G CNO, Amphibious Operations—Capture o f
Okinawa, 27Mar-21Jun45 (OpNav 34-P-0700) ,
dtd 22Jan46, chap 7, p. 20, hereafter CNO
Record.
94 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
many assault wave Marines were embarked on the faster attack transports
which, together with the rest of the
Northern Attack Force transport
groups, left from the mounting area on
15 March to join the ICEBERG forc e
gathering at Ulithi.
The immense lagoon at Ulithi Atol l
was the westernmost American fleet
anchorage, staging base, and repair
depot in the Pacific. Midway betwee n
the Marianas and the Palaus, Ulithi was
captured without opposition in September 1944, and was developed immediately to support naval operations in th e
western Pacific as well as to serve as
an advance base for the Philippines invasion. Once occupied and built up, th e
islets of the atoll served also as limite d
recreation areas where personnel of al l
services could regain their landlegs and
participate in a somewhat restricte d
physical conditioning program.
On 21 March, both the transport
group and the tractor flotilla of TF 5 3
arrived at Ulithi, anchored, and on the
following day, APA-borne assault
troops were transferred to the landing
ships which were to carry them the remaining 1,400 miles to Okinawa. Once
the transfer was completed, small boat s
began ferrying recreation parties
ashore. Here the rigors of shipboar d
confinement were forgotten by a combination of organized athletics and an
issue of not-too-cool cokes and beer.
For many of the troops, this stopover
on the long voyage towards the unknown was made exciting by the fascinating sight of the constantly shiftin g
fleet groupment whose makeup change d
from day-to-day and hour-to-hour as
carriers, battleships, cruisers, and
smaller combat vessels departed for
strikes against the enemy or returned
from completed missions. In the midst
of this activity, the scattered elements
of the Expeditionary Troops filtered in
to join those forces which had arrived
earlier.
Despite the relaxing effect of sun,
sand, and surf at Ulithi, the nightly
alerts to the presence of Japanes e
snooper planes was a continual re -
minder that a war still .existed. This
grim fact was brought home to many
men in the invasion force on the gloomy,
fog-bound Saturday afternoon of 2 4
March when the battered carrier
Franklin limped into the anchorage
shepherded by the USS Santa Fe.
On the next day, a brilliantly sunlit
Sunday, the bruised and battered
Franklin could be seen more clearly as
she lay at anchor. Her top rigging,
aerials, and radar towers were gone or
twisted completely out of shape . Her
flight deck was buckled and undulating .
These were the external damage s
wrought by the internal explosions o f
bombs that had penetrated to lower
decks when Japanese suicide planes
furiously attacked the carrier on 1 9
March, during TF 38 strikes against
enemy shipping at Kure and Kobe . As
the most heavily damaged carrier to b e
saved in the war, the Franklin was able
to make the 12,000-mile trip to New
York for repairs under her own power,
stopping only at Pearl Harbor on th e
way.
The Northern Tractor Flotilla sortied
from the Ulithi anchorage for Okinawa
on 25 March and, two days later, th e
remainder of the assault echelon se t
forth in its wake . Saipan was the scene,
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 95
on the same dates., of the Demonstratio n
Group departure.
Loading operations of the 2d Marin e
Division were eased by the fact that its
lift, Transron 15, had laid over briefly
at Saipan in February while en rout e
to Iwo Jima. At that time, division
transport quartermasters (TQMs) obtained ships' characteristics data which
proved more accurate than the information provided earlier by FMFPac.
As a result, the TQMs were better abl e
to plan for a more efficient use of cargo
and personnel space .
In addition to the responsibility fo r
loading his reinforced division, General
Watson was given the duty of coordinating the loading of all ICEBERG
Marine assault and first echelon force s
elsewhere in the Marianas and at Ro i
in the Marshalls. 2 6
In preparing for Okinawa, the only
real problem confronting General Mulcahy's Marine air units was the coordinated loading of ground and flight elements. According to the logistical planning, planes and pilots were to be lifte d
to the target on board escort carriers,
while ground crews and nonflying units
were to make the trip in assault and
first echelon shipping. As the organizations comprising the Tactical Air
Force were widely dispersed, their loading and embarkation was supervised, of
necessity, by local commanders of th e
areas where the air groups and squadrons were based .
Mounting from Oahu in the TA F
=8 Units involved were : MAG—31 at Roi ; 1st
SepEngrBn and 16th AAA Bn at Tinian ;
Corps EvacHosp No . 2 and 2d AAA Bn at
Guam ; and 7th F1dDep, 1st Prov MP Bn, and
LFASCU—1 at Saipan .
assault echelon were the headquarters
squadrons of the 2d Marine Aircraft
Wing and MAG-43, and Air Warning
Squadrons (AWSs) 7 and 8. Headquarters Squadrons 2 and 43 became the
headquarters commands of TAF and
General Wallace's Air Defense Command, respectively. The TAF transport
quartermaster coordinated the mounting out of the Oahu-based units with his
opposite numbers on the staffs of th e
Tenth Army and the 2d MAW . The
Marines from AWS–8 and the forwar d
echelons of Mulcahy's and Wallace's
headquarters commands left Pearl Harbor on 22 February, while AWS–7 de -
parted Pearl the same month in two
increments, one on the 10th and the sec -
ond on the 21st.
Colonel John C. Munn's MAG–31 embarked from Roi and Namur in the
Marshall Islands. The group service
squadron and ground personnel of
Marine Fighter Squadrons 224, 311 ,
and 441 boarded transport and cargo
vessels which, in turn, joined the ICEBERG convoy forming at Saipan .
Flight personnel and their planes went
aboard the escort carriers Breton on the
night of 22–23 March, Sitkoh Bay on 24
March and were staged through Ulithi
where they were joined by Marine
Night Fighter Squadron 542.
MAG–33 (Colonel Ward E . Dickey)
mounted from Espiritu Santo in the
New Hebrides. While IIIAC was responsible for the embarkation of th e
MAG, the group itself supervised the
loading of its ground and service elements which joined the Northern
Attack Force off Guadalcanal. The
pilots of VMF–312, -322, and -323 flew
their F4Us (Corsairs) to Manus via
96 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Guadalcanal and Green Island. There
they boarded the escort carriers Whit e
Plains and Hollandia. Already on board
the latter was VMF (N) -543 which had
boarded the vessel at Pearl Harbor o n
11 March. Its ground personnel had de -
parted from the same port three weeks
earlier.
Outside of the TAF chain of command, but closely related to its combat
functions, were Landing Force Air Support Control Units 1, 2, and 3. Two
weeks after returning to its Saipan
base from the Iwo Jima operation,
LFASCU–1 loaded aboard ship for an
immediate return engagement with th e
enemy at Okinawa . The other two
LFASCUs were based at Ewa, T. H. ,
where they trained for ICEBERG, and
mounted for the invasion in Februar y
1945, later staging for the target
through Leyte .
As it had no need for an intermediat e
staging area, the XXIV Corps departed
for Okinawa directly from Leyte . General Bruce's 77th Infantry Division ,
which was to open the Ryukyus operation with the assault on Kerama Retto ,
finished loading its landing ships on 1 8
March and its transports on the 20th ,
each echelon leaving for the target on
the day following . The 7th and 96th
Divisions conducted their own loading
under the supervision of XXIV Corps
TQMs, who spotted Southern Landing
Force shipping at the most satisfactory
point on the landing beaches. The
Southern Tractor Flotilla departed
Leyte during the morning hours of 2 4
March ; the transport groups followed
three days later.
By the evening of 27 March, all ICEBERG assault elements were at sea,
converging on Okinawa . Soldiers and
Marines aboard the transports and
landing vessels had already made themselves as comfortable as possible under
the crowded conditions and had settled
down to shipboard routine. Officers and
key NCOs reviewed their unit operatio n
plans, examined maps and terrai n
models of the landing area, and held
daily briefing sessions with their men .
At the same time they squared away
their combat gear for the invasion, mos t
of the men of Hebrew and Christia n
faiths also prepared themselves for religious observances of Passover or
Good Friday and Easter, all three holidays falling within a few days of eac h
other in 1945.
NEUTRALIZING THE ENEMY 2
7
After the first carrier strike of 1 0
October 1944, Naha's fire- and explosion-gutted ruins furnished the Japanese defenders with visual evidence of
the effectiveness of American naval ai r
power and served as an ominous portent
of the future. One observer, a Japanese
soldier, complained in his diary that ,
"the enemy is brazenly planning to completely destroy every last ship, cut ou r
supply lines, and attack us." 2 8
Okinawa was not visited again by
Vice Admiral John S . McCain's Fast
Carrier Force (TF 38) until 3 and 4
=7 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : CinCPac WarDs
Jan-Mar45 ; CTF 52 AR ; Tenth Army AR ;
War Reports ; Okinawa Operations Record ;
Morison, Victory in the Pacific .
""Diary of a radioman, 5th Harbor Bas e
Unit," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bul 147-45,
Translations and Interrogations No . 32, dtd
16Jun45, p. 50.
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 9 7
January 1945, when, in conjunctio n
with a heavy attack on Formosa, the
Ryukyu and Sakashima Islands were
also struck. Commenting on this raid, a
Japanese replacement confided in his
diary that "seeing enemy planes for the
first time since coming to Okinaw a
somehow or other gave me the feeling
of being in a combat zone ." 29 The return of the Navy planes on 22 January
reinforced his first impression and
further shook his seeming complacency ,
as that day's diary entry implied resentment. "While some fly around overhea d
and strafe, the big bastards fly over th e
airfield and drop bombs. The ferocity o f
the bombing is terrific . It really make s
me furious. It is past 1500 and the rai d
is still on. At 1800 the last two plane s
brought the raid to a close . What the
hell kind of bastards are they? Bomb
from 0600 to 1800!" 3 °
During January, TF 38 struck Formosa and the Ryukyus twice, and mad e
some uninvited calls on South China
coastal ports, all while covering the
Luzon landings. After its last attack,
the force retired to Ulithi where rein -
forcing carriers were waiting to join .
On 27 January, the same day that Admiral Nimitz arrived at his new advance headquarters on Guam,31 the
command of the Pacific fleet's strikin g
2° "Diary of an unidentified superior private ,
273d IIB," in Ibid., p . 70 .
3° Ibid.
31 Because Pearl Harbor was too far fro m
the war area, the recently promoted Fleet
Admiral Nimitz transferred his flag to Guam
on 2 January in order to direct the Pacific war
effort from a vantage point closer to the scen e
of' the fighting.
force was changed and Admirals
Spruance and Mitscher relieved Halse y
and McCain. When Mitscher's carriers
departed Ulithi on 10 February, it was
in the guise of Task Force 58, which was
destined to continue the work that T F
38 had begun .
As a diversion for the 19 Februar y
Marine landing on Iwo Jima, and to
reduce the Japanese capability fo r
launching air attacks against the expeditionary force, Mitscher's Fast Carrier Force struck at the Tokyo area on
16–17 February and again on the 25th .
In between these attacks, Mitscher's
planes and ships supported the Iwo
assault from D-Day until the 23d, a t
which time they sortied for the 2 5
February Tokyo strike . As TF 58 retired to Ulithi on 1 March, planes of
Task Units 58.1, 58.2, and 58.3 photographed Okinawa, Kerama Retto ,
Minami Daito, and Amami 0 Shima ,
and bombed and strafed targets of opportunity. These three units returned
to Ulithi on the 5th.
At the same time that the fast carriers were making their forays, American submarines and naval patrol
bombers ranged the western Pacifi c
taking a steadily increasing toll of Japanese shipping. The bottom of the China
Sea was littered with the broken hulls
and loads of enemy transports and
cargo ships which never reached thei r
destinations. Almost complete isolation
of the Okinawa garrison was accomplished by mid-February 1945 through
the combined efforts of Navy air and
submarine forces. It soon became apparent to General Ushijima that his
Ryukyus command stood alone since
"communications between the mainland
98 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
of Japan and Formosa had been practically severed ." 3 2
The neutralization and isolation o f
Okinawa was furthered by the continuous series of strategic air strikes on
the Japanese industrial network by
Army Air Forces bombers, which
mounted attacks from bases in China,
India, the Philippines, the Marianas,
and the Palaus. Massive raids on th e
factories of the main islands as well a s
on outlying sources of raw materials
hindered Japan's ability and will to continue the war. Giant super-fortresse s
also rose from airfields in the southern
Marianas in steadily increasing numbers to hit Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya, and
Kobe, widening the fire-swept circl e
around the expanse of previously devastated areas. During the interludes between carrier-plane attacks on the
Ryukyus, B–29 appearances over Okinawa became so commonplace that th e
Japanese defenders referred to their
visits as "regular runs." 3 3
With the approach of L-Day, th e
tempo of covering operations was accelerated throughout the Pacific . For its
final strike on Japan prior to the Okinawa landing. TF 58 steamed out of th e
Ulithi anchorage on 14 March . Four
days later, carrier-launched planes interdicted Kyushu's heavily-laden airfields, and attacked installations o n
Shikoku and Honshu islands on th e
19th. The task force did not escape unscathed this time, however, for the
enemy was ready and retaliated with
heavy counterstrikes during which the
Japanese pilots displayed reckless
"Okinawa Operations Record, p. 62.
33 "Diary of an unidentified superior private ,
273d IIB," op. cit., p . 49 .
abandon and a wanton disregard for
their lives. Five carriers and other ships
in the task force were hit hard . A temporary task group composed of th e
damaged carriers Wasp, Franklin, and
Enterprise, the cruiser Santa Fe, and
Destroyer Squadron 52 returned to
Ulithi for necessary repairs. The ships
remaining in TF 58, the carriers, the
battleship force, and the protective
screen, were reorganized into three task
groups of relatively equal strength on
22 March. With this force, Admiral
Mitscher then began the final run on
Okinawa for the beginning of the pre -
invasion bombardments .
PREINVASION PREPARATIONS
AND THE KERAMA RETTO
LANDING 3 4
The first elements of the ICEBERG
force to appear at the target were the
doughty sweepers of Mine Group One ,
which began operations off Kerama
Retto and the southeastern coast of
Okinawa on 24 March, just two days
before the 77th Infantry Division was
to land in the Keramas. After the minecraft cleared a channel outside the 100-
fathom curve off the Minatoga beaches,
part of Admiral Mitscher's battleshi p
force, temporarily organized as TF 59 ,
steamed through the swept area and
bombarded Okinawa while TF 58 planes
covered and neutralized enemy shore
31 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : CinCPOA OPla n
14—44 ; CTF 51 OPlan AI—45 ; CTF 51 AR ;
CTF 52 AR ; CTG 51 .1 AR; Tenth Army AR ;
77th Inf Div OpRpt ; PhibReconBn, FMFPac ,
AR, Phase I and II, Nansei Shoto Operation ,
n.d ., hereafter PhibReconBn AR ; War Reports ; Morison, Victory in the Pacific .
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 9 9
installations. By late afternoon, as T F
59 withdrew to rejoin the carrier force ,
the mine vessels finished that day' s
planned program of preliminary sweeps.
During these operations, the Amphibious Support Force, with elements of
the Gunfire and Covering Force (Admiral Deyo serving as Officer in Tactica l
Command), had completed the run from
Ulithi and deployed into approach formation. Two fire support units left TF
54 to begin their respective assignments
—one unit to cover the sweep conducte d
between Tonachi Shima and Kerama
Retto, and the other to cover the min e
sweepers off Okinawa and to begin
bombarding the demonstration beaches .
An important TF 52 element was th e
Underwater Demolition Flotilla, consisting of 10 underwater demolition
teams (UDTs) organized into tw o
groups, Able and Baker. On the afternoon of 24 March, the high spee d
destroyer transports (APDs) of Grou p
Able and destroyers of TF 54 forme d
for the next day's UDT and NGF operations at Kerama . The remainder of
Admiral Deyo's force was concentrate d
and ready to repulse all Japanese surface or air attacks. 3 5
A carefully planned feature of th e
ICEBERG operation was this concen -
,5 The command relationship between Admirals Blandy (CTF 52) and Deyo (CTF 54 )
requires clarification. Blandy, as a Senior Officer Present Afloat (SOPA), was responsibl e
for the execution of all operations at the target
while Deyo, although Blandy's senior, was responsible for the TF 54 movement and approach to the target (and for any TF 52 ships
moving with TF 54), for the conduct of surface actions should there be any, and for the
night deployments. CNO Record, chap 1, pp.
33-34.
310-224 0 - 69 - 8
tration of naval strength. With ample
sea room and sufficient fighting powe r
to eliminate any or all of the remnants
of the Japanese Navy, TF 58 lay to the
east of the Ryukyus in the Pacific
Ocean. In the East China Sea, to the
west of Okinawa, the majority of the
combat ships of the Amphibious Sup -
port Force was concentrated, ready t o
stop any attempt to reinforce or evacuate the garrison. At night, the ship s
assigned to the bombardment of Okinawa's southeastern coast retired together so that their mission could b e
resumed without delay the following
morning. In the event of any surface
action, each of these task groups was
able to operate and support itself independently.
As vaster areas surrounding Okinaw a
were swept clear of mines, destroyer s
and gunboats began patrol operations
and made the beleaguered enemy's isolation a certainty. Shipborne radar
picket stations, disposed from 15 to 100
miles offshore, encircled the island to
protect the invasion force from the constant threat of surprise enemy air
attacks. Aboard the destroyers and
destroyer minesweepers serving as
picket vessels were fighter-director
teams which controlled the combat air
patrols (CAPs) of carrier planes which
orbited overhead during the hours of
daylight. When Japanese flights were
detected on picket radar screens, the
CAP was vectored out to intercept and
destroy the enemy. The bulk of the
heavy losses incurred by the Navy during the battle for Okinawa was born e
by the vessels comprising the radar
picket fleet. The value of their services
in protecting the vulnerable transport
100 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
and service areas is measured by the
large number of Japanese planes shot
down before they had reached their objectives.
Although the destructive TF 58 raids
on Kyushu had temporarily disrupted
enemy plans for air attacks from the
home islands, the Japanese managed to
mount an increasing number of raids
from fields in the Formosa area . Once it
became apparent that Okinawa was to
be invaded and that Okinawa waters
held lucrative targets, forward elements of the 8th Air Division rose from
their fields in the Sakashimas to make
their first Kamikaze attack on ships
standing off Kerama Retto at dawn o n
26 March. 3 6
Beginning with this first, hour-long
enemy air raid, the loss of lives and
damage to ships mounted as Japanese
bombers and suiciders made sneak
attacks on the amphibious force in the
dawn and dusk twilight hours. 37 As part
of its planned schedule of preliminary
operations supporting ICEBERG, Vice
Admiral Sir H. Bernard Rawling's
British Carrier Force (TF 57) struck
Sakashima Gunto on the 26th and 27th.
Since the carriers had blocked the us e
of Sakashima and Kyushu, the Japanes e
had to use Okinawa-based planes t o
attack the American invasion forces.
The employment in three suicidal forays
of all available aircraft, including
" Okinawa Operations Record, "Record of
the 8th AirDiv," Chart 1 .
" More correctly known as morning and
evening nautical twilights, these are the brie f
periods preceding sunrise and following sunse t
when general outlines may be visible, although
the horizon cannot be distinguished, and approaching aircraft are virtually invisible .
trainers, liaison craft, and planes of a
Special Attack Unit which managed to
fly in from Kyushu, led to the complete
elimination of the air strength of the
Okinawa garrison by 29 March . 3 8
Claims of enemy airmen who survived to return to home bases wer e
grossly exaggerated, but their destructiveness was extensive . A summary of
damages to American forces for the
period 26 to 31 March reveals that si x
ships, including Admiral Spruance' s
flagship Indianapolis, were crashed by
suicide-bent enemy pilots. Near misses
accounted for damage to 10 other vessels, while floating mines sank 2 ships
and an encounter with a Japanes e
torpedo boat gave another American
ship minor damage.
Despite costly harassment from Japanese air attacks, Admiral Blandy's force
proceeded with its primary task of pre -
paring the target for the assault . Four
Group Able UDTs cleared beach approaches in Kerama Retto on 26 March
and began blowing Keise Shima reefs
the next day. Because Okinawa's offshor e
waters had not been completely cleared
of mines, the reconnaissance and demoli -
tion work scheduled for the 28th was
delayed a day. Elements of Group Able
scouted the demonstration beaches o n
the 29th, while Group Baker teams reconnoitered the Hagushi beaches.
During this reconnaissance of the
west coast landing area, Group Baker
swimmers discovered approximately
2,900 wooden posts embedded in the
reef near its seaward edge and stretching for some distance on either side of
the Bishi Gawa. These posts, which
were on the average six inches in
' 8 Okinawa Operations Record, pp. 65-66.
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS
LANDING CRAFT form up for the run to Kerama Retto beaches on 26 March 1945 .
Viewed from USS Minneapolis . (USN 80-G-816830)
155MM GUNS of the 420th Field Artillery Group are set up on Keise Shima to shell
enemy main defenses prior to the Tenth Army assault landing . (USA SC205503)
101
102 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
diameter and from four to eight feet i n
height, were generally aligned five fee t
apart in rows of three or four. Although
some of these obstacles were loose, a
few were set in concrete and the rest
wedged into the coral. On 30 March the y
were blown up with hand-placed
charges. All but 200 posts were destroyed by L-Day and it was believed
that the landing would not be hindere d
by those that remained. 3 °
Accompanying the UDTs during the
beach reconnaissance and initial demolitions operations were assault troop observers, who acted as liaison and reconnaissance personnel . 40 Their primary
function was to brief the UDTs on th e
schemes of maneuver and location of
the landing areas of their respectiv e
assault units, to make certain that specific beaches were cleared, and to obtain current intelligence concerning th e
beaches and surrounding terrain . As
soon as these preinvasion operations
had been completed (29 and 30 March) ,
the observers were returned by ship to
join their parent organizations in the
approaching attack groups. In general,
the intelligence reports submitted by
the observers favored a successful landing across the entire Tenth Army front .
Because the waters surrounding Okinawa had been heavily mined, 41 the
'° CTF 52 AR, pt V, sec G, p . 3.
" ° The allocation of Tenth Army observers
to the UDTs was based on the assignment of
one officer for each battalion in the assault,
one for each RCT, division, and corps, and one
for the army. Tenth Army TntvOPlan 1-45,
Anx 4, App A, p . 1 .
" TF 52 estimated that its minecraft swept
and reswept over 3,000 square miles in the si x
days before L-Day. In this period, 257 mines
were destroyed.
scheduled NGF bombardment did not
begin until 25 March (L minus 7) whe n
TF 54 fire support vessels were able t o
close to ranges of maximum effectiveness. Carrier air was able to pound Okinawa repeatedly, however, and was me t
by only ineffectual and desultory fir e
from enemy antiaircraft defenses. In
the course of the 3,095 sorties that the
TF 52 Combat Air Support Control Unit
(CASCU) directed against Okinaw a
prior to L-Day, special attention wa s
given to the destruction of submarine
pens, airfields, suicide boat installations,
bridges over the roads leading into the
landing area, and gun positions. After
the pilots were debriefed, each day' s
strike results were evaluated by th e
CASCU on board Admiral Blandy's
flagship, USS Estes, and considered together with damage estimates of ships'
guns. The schedule of air missions and
the NGF plans were revised and co -
ordinated, and plans for the next day's
sorties and shoots were then issued.
Initial target lists compiled by the
Tenth Army artillery section and TF 5 4
intelligence section were constantly revised as analyses, based on aerial observation and photo reconnaissance ,
were received. As new evaluations were
made of the destruction of enemy positions and installations, and new targets
tabulated, cards listing the correcte d
data were delivered to the target information centers (TICs) of IIIAC an d
XXIV Corps. From the time that the
bombardment of Okinawa began unti l
L-Day, General Nimmer's TIC receive d
copies of all dispatches sent from th e
objective by CTF 54. From these reports., all information relative to the
discovery, attack, damage, and destruc-
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 103
tion of targets in the IIIAC landin g
zone was excerpted and used to brin g
the target map and target file up-todate. 4 2
Although Admiral Blandy's bombardment force expended 27,226 rounds of
5-inch or larger-caliber ammunition o n
Okinawa, extensive damage was done
only to surface installations, especially
those in the vicinity of the airfields. As
the ground forces were to discove r
later, the Japanese sustained little destruction of well dug-in defenses, and
few losses among the men who manned
them. On the day before the landing, as
a result of his evaluation of the effect of
air and NGF bombardment, CTF 5 2
could report that "the preparation wa s
sufficient for a successful landing." 4 3
Admiral Biandy also stated that "we di d
not conclude from [the enemy's silence ]
that all defense installations had been
destroyed. . . . " 4 4
A prerequisite which Admiral Turner
felt would guarantee the success of ICE -
BERG was the seizure of Kerama Retto
and Keise Shima prior to L-Day. Because of the advantages to be gained b y
all ICEBERG assault and support elements., the taking of these islands was
made an essential feature of the Tenth
Army operation plan. Naval units, particularly, would benefit since th e
42 "At H-Hour on D-Day it is estimated that
the TIC files showed about 500 active target s
suitable for attack by artillery, naval gunfire,
and support aircraft, all located in the III Phib
Corps zone of action for Phase One of the
operations." LtCol John G. Bouker ltr to CMC,
dtd 9Jan48, Subj : Operations of III Amphibious Corps Target Information Center on Okinawa, hereafter Bouker ltr.
43 CTF 52 AR, pt V, sec C, p. 5.
44 Ibid.
Keramas provided a sheltered flee t
anchorage in the objective area wher e
emergency repairs, refueling, and re -
arming operations could be accomplished. Once the envisioned seaplan e
base was established, Navy patrol
bombers could range from Korea to
Indochina in search and rescue mission s
and antisubmarine warfare operations.
With the emplacement of XXIV Corps
Artillery guns on Keise Shima and their
registry on Okinawa, preliminaries for
the main assault would be complete.
Even if the Keramas had had no
value as an advanced logistics base, they
would have been taken . The suspected
presence of suicide sea raiding squadrons in the island chain was confirme d
when the 77th Infantry Division landed ,
and captured and destroyed 350 of th e
squadrons' suicide boats. Their threat
to the Okinawa landing was undeniable ,
for these small craft were to spee d
from their hideouts in the Keramas'
small islands to the American anchorages. Here, "The objective of the attac k
will be transports, loaded with essentia l
supplies and material and personnel . . .," ordered General Ushijima .
"The attack will be carried out by concentrating maximum strength immediately upon the enemy's landing." 45 The
surprise thrust into the Keramas frustrated the Japanese plan and undoubtedly eased initial ICEBERG operation s
at the Hagushi beaches. At the time
that the 77th was poised to strike th e
Keramas, the islands were defended by
approximately 975 Japanese troops, of
whom only the some 300 boat operator s
""Thirty-second Army OperO No . 115, dtd
23Mar45," in Tenth Army Trans No . 231, dt d
6Ju145.
104 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
of the sea raiding squadrons had an y
combat value . The rest of the defense
was comprised of about 600 Korea n
laborers and nearly 100 base troops.
On 26 March, the day following th e
sweep of Kerama waters by the minecraft and reconnaissance of its beache s
by UDT personnel, Admiral Kiland' s
Western Islands Attack Group moved
into position for the assault. A battleship, two large cruisers, and four
destroyers had been assigned to provide
NGF support for the landing, but only
the 5-inch guns of the destroyers were
used extensively. The capital ships wer e
not called on to fire but remained on
standby. As LSTs disgorged their cargo
of armored amphibians and troop-laden
assault tractors for the run to the
beaches, carrier planes orbited the
transport area to ward off Japanese
suicide planes which were beginning t o
filter through the outer fighter screen .
Aircraft bombed the beaches as th e
assault waves were guided toward th e
target by LCIs assigned to give close-i n
support. 46 (See Map 5. )
At 0801, the first of the four assaul t
battalions of the 77th hit its target and
in a little over an hour's time the other
three had attacked their own objectives.
Before noon, General Bruce saw tha t
the rapid progress of his landing teams
ashore would permit yet another landing that day, so he directed the 2d Battalion, 307th Infantry, a reserve unit,
to take Yakabi Shima . Since this island's
9e The Support Craft Flotilla was compose d
of two mortar, three rocket, and four gunboa t
divisions. The 42 LCIs and 54 LSMs in this
unit were organized into teams of various type s
and assigned to a specific beach and landing.
PhibGru 7 AR, dtd 26May45.
defenders offered little resistance, it
was secured by 1341 . By the end of the
day the 77th had done quite well, having seized three Kerama islands out -
right and established a firm foothold o n
two others.
Within a six-day period, 26–31 March,
at a cost of 31 killed and 81 wounded ,
the 77th Infantry Division completely
fulfilled its mission as the vanguard of
ICEBERG Expeditionary Troops. In
the process of removing. the threat
posed by the Japanese to operations in
the Kerama anchorage, General Bruce's
troops killed 530 of the enemy, captured
121 more, and rounded up some 1,195
civilians. All of the enemy were not disposed of, however, for scattered Japanese soldiers remained hidden in the
hills of the various Kerama islands an d
even occasionally communicated with
units on Okinawa. 4 7
Marine participation in pre-L-Da y
activities was confined to the operations
of Major James L. Jones' FMF Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion . For the
Keramas invasion, it was split into two
tactical groups, one under the battalion
commander and the other under his
executive officer. Only two companies of
the battalion were available for anticipated missions, since Company B had
been assigned to the V Amphibiou s
Corps for the Iwo Jima landing and did
not return to its parent organization
until after L-Day.
On the night of 26–27 March, while
the 77th consolidated its conquests an d
prepared for the next day's battles, Major Jones' men landed on and reconnoitered the reef islets comprising
" Okinawa Operations Record, p . 66.

106 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Keise Shima . 49 When reconnaissance of
the small group revealed no trace of th e
enemy., the Marines reboarded their
APDs with information of reef, beach,
and terrain conditions. Their findings
were then forwarded to the 77th Division intelligence officer for evaluation
and distribution to the units which wer e
to land on Keise Shima.
During the night of 27–28 March ,
scouts from Company A landed o n
Aware Saki, a small island off the
southern tip of Tokashiki Shima . Again
there was no evidence of the enemy . The
only encounter with the Japanese occurred on 29 March, during early morning landings on Mae and Kuro Shima ,
two small islands which lie between th e
Kerama Retto and Keise Shima. At
0630, a suicide boat, apparently manned
by only one soldier, was observed heading at high speed for Mae Shima's beac h
from Tokashiki Shima . The one-ma n
regatta was brought to a speedy an d
spectacular end as the explosive-lade n
craft disintegrated under a hail of
machine gun fire . A reconnaissance o f
Kure Shima shortly thereafter indicated no troops or civilians, nor an y
installations.
In order to remove some of the
"e Keise Shima or Keisan Sho (sho, i n
Japanese, is shoal or reef) is five miles WN W
of Naha and consists of three sand-and pebble -
islands ; Kuefu Shima, Naganna Shima, an d
Kamiyama Shima, the last-named being two
low sandy islands separated by a 100-yard-wide
strait. For simplicity, and in keeping with th e
usage established by action reports and previously written histories of the Okinawa campaign, this small island grouping will be referred to as Keise Shima in this account also .
obstacles to the landing of XXIV Corp s
Artillery units on Keise Shima on 3 1
March., UDTs blasted a path through
the off-shore coral reefs early that
morning, and this completed the work
they had begun on the 27th. Then, after
2/306 landed unopposed and determine d
that no enemy had slipped back to
Keise after the Marine reconnaissance,
men and equipment of the 420th Field
Artillery Group went ashore and immediately set up to fire. By 1935, the
group's 155mm guns ("Long Toms") began registering on preselected targets
in southern Okinawa . There, the Japanese later reported, they "incessantl y
obstructed our movements by laying an
abundant quantity of fire inside our
positions, the fire being directed mainl y
to cut off our communications." 40 Also
landing on Keise were part of a team
from an Army air warning squadron
and an AAA (automatic weapons)
platoon which, when ashore and set up ,
became part of the area antiaircraft defense system.
Already beset by American carrierbased strikes and by ships' gunfir e
which blasted Okinawa in a precise and
businesslike manner, the Japanese fel t
that the artillery fire from Keise wa s
overdoing it a bit. A special attack unit
was formed to raid the island artiller y
emplacements., and the 5th Artillery
Command's 15cm guns were ordered to
conduct counterbattery fire in an
attempt to destroy the American Long
Toms. Neither measure attained success, and the Thirty-second Army was
never able to enforce its order to "stop
" Okinawa Operations Record, pp. 66-67.
ASSAULT PREPARATIONS 107
the use of enemy artillery on Keis e
Shima." 5 0
Before L-Day, the floating naval bas e
in the Kerama Retto was functioning
at a high pitch. From watery take-off
lanes, seaplanes rose to harass enemy
submarines and shipping in the Chin a
Sea. Kamikaze-damaged vessels wer e
salvaged and repaired on an around-theclock schedule, while the rearming, refueling, and revictualling of health y
ships kept pace. Without this frontlin e
logistical facility, "many more ships an d
personnel of the service force than wer e
available in the Okinawa area would
have been required at sea to make replenishment an accomplished fact for
all fleet forces." 5 1
In contrast to the conspicuous prelanding operations of ICEBERG force s
in the target area, the Thirty-second
Army was able to surround its tactical
dispositions with a greater degree of
secrecy. Not until after the landing on
Okinawa and relentless probing by th e
assault forces did the Tenth Army learn
what the strength of the enemy was an d
where his positions were . Before
L-Day, American knowledge of enem y
dispositions was sketchy, and as late as
L minus 1 (31 March), the G–3 of the
""32d Army OperO A #127, dtd 6Apr45, "
in CICAS Trans No. 266. Although this orde r
directed the CO of the shipping engineers to
organize a raiding unit and attack Keise on
the night of 6 April 1945, no contemporary
records show that this operation was carried
through .
RAdm Worrall R. Carter, Beans, Bullets,
and Black Oil (Washington : GPO, 1953), p.
353, hereafter Carter, Beans, Bullets, and
Black Oil.
6th Marine Division was told that "th e
Hagushi beaches were held in grea t
strength." 5 2
The factor which tipped the scales i n
favor of an unopposed Allied landing o n
the Hagushi beaches was General
Ushijima's decision to defend the southeast coast of Okinawa in strength.
When the 2d Marine Division made its
feint landings on D-Day and D plus 1 ,
the Japanese commander's staff believe d
its earlier estimate that "powerful elements might attempt a landing [on the
Minatoga beaches]" was fully justified.J3 Consequently, a substantial portion of the artillery and infantry
strength of the Thirty-second Army was
immobilized in face of a threat in th e
southeast that never materialized.
Although Ushijima's command had
prepared for an American landing else -
where, from the Japanese point of view
the Hagushi beaches remained the most
obvious target. Even while propagand a
reports—mostly untrue—of successfu l
Kamikaze attacks against the invasion
fleet bolstered Japanese morale, th e
commander of a scratch force formed
from airfield personnel on the islan d
warned his men not "to draw the hasty
conclusion that we had been able to
destroy the enemy's plan of landing on
Okinawa Jima." 54 The commander of
52 Capt Edward F. Townley, Jr., ltr to Asst
G-3, HQMC, dtd 4Dec65.
'" Okinawa Operations Record, p . 67 .
'1st Specially Established Regt Oper O
No . 1, dtd 30Mar45," in CinCPac-CinCPO A
Bul 107-45, Translations and Interrogations
No. 28 dtd 14May45 .
108 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
the 1st Specially Established Regiment, been distributed, the Northern and
Lieutenant Colonel Tokio Aoyangai, Southern Attack Forces were moving
proved himself clairvoyant, for in less into their transport areas ready to
than 24 hours after his message had launch the assault .
CHAPTER 4
The First Days Ashore
SEIZURE OF THE BEACHHEAD '
Optimum weather conditions for a n
amphibious landing prevailed at the
target on L-Day when the Central
Pacific Task Forces launched the attac k
against Okinawa on 1 April 1945 ,
Easter Sunday. The coming of dawn
revealed cloudy to clear skies and a cal m
sea with but a negligible surf at the
shore . Moderate easterly to northeasterly winds were blowing offshore, just
enough to carry the smoke away from
the beaches. To the many veteran
jungle fighters among the invading
troops, the 75-degree temperature
seemed comfortably cool.
At the target, the major naval lift
and support elements moved into thei r
assigned areas off the Hagushi beaches .
Once in position, the ships prepared to
Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : CTF 51 AR ;
Tenth Army AR; XXIV Corps AR ; ILIAC AR ;
1st MarDiv SAR; 1st MarDiv G—3 Jnl, 28Feb -
13Ju145, hereafter 1st MarDiv G—3 Jnl, with
appropriate date ; 1st Mar SAR, Nansei Shoto,
dtd 25Ju145, hereafter 1st Mar SAR ; 5th Mar
S—3 Jnl, 15Jan-26Ju145, hereafter 5th Mar S—3
Jnl, with appropriate date ; 7th Mar SAR,
Phase I and II, dtd 1May45, and Phase III,
dtd 11Ju145, hereafter 7th Mar SAR; 6th
MarDiv SAR, Ph 1&II; 6th MarDiv Unit Jnl,
Phase I and II, 1-22Apr45, hereafter 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II, with appropriate date . The
action reports of the major component unit s
of the 6th Marine Division are included a s
annexes to the division SAR and will be cited
separately as 4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II; 1/4 SAR,
Ph I&II ; 6th TkBn SAR, Ph I&II; etc.
debark troops. Off the Minatoga beache s
on the other side of the island, the same
preparations were conducted concurrently by the shipping that carried the
2d Marine Division .
Admiral Turner unleashed his force s
at 0406 with the traditional order,
"Land the Landing Force," 2 and Okinawa's ordeal began with a percussiv e
overture of naval gunfire . (See Map 6. )
The enemy reacted to the landing
shortly after dawn as he mounted scattered air attacks on the convoys. In the
continuing belief that the main effort
was directed at the Minatoga area, th e
few Japanese aircraft not destroyed by
American carrier air or ships' antiaircraft guns disregarded the more lucrative targets off Hagushi and concentrated on Demonstration Group
shipping. Kamikazes struck the transport Hinsdale and LST 884 as troops,
mostly from the 3d Battalion, 2d Marines 3 and its reinforcing elements,
were disembarking for the feint run int o
the beaches. Reported killed were 8 Marines ; 37 were wounded, and 8 were
2 CTF 53 AR, pt III, p. 12.
Throughout this campaign narrative, th e
designation "3d Battalion, 1st Marines" will be
used interchangeably with "3/1" or "BLT
3/1," the latter number depending upon which
regimental unit is involved . Also, 4th Marines
or 5th Marines is synonymous with RCT 4 o r
RCT 5 . Reinforcing troops which make an
infantry regiment an RCT are considered to be
included in the RCT designation. A BLT's
reinforcement is likewise to be included in the
BLT designation .
109
110 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
MAIN BATTERIES of USS Tennessee hurl tons of high explosives at Okinawa as
assault amtracs head for the beachhead . (USN 80-G-319325)
AERIAL VIEW of the Hagushi anchorage and Yontan airfield on L plus 2, looking
southeast from Zampa Misaki. (USN 80-G-3392.42)
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 111
listed as missing in action . 4 It is somewhat ironic that units not even scheduled to land on Okinawa on L-Day sustained the first troop casualties.
Air support arrived over the target
in force at 0650 5 and the assault forces
began to debark ten minutes later. The
transport areas became the scenes of
purposeful activity as troops climbed
down landing nets into waiting landing
craft, while armored amphibians, and
amphibian tractors preloaded with
troops and equipment, spewed forth
from the open jaws of LSTs. At the
same time, tank-carrying LCMs (landing craft, mechanized) floated from the
flooded well decks of LSDs (landing
ships, dock) . Other tanks, rigged with
T–6 flotation equipment, debarked from
LSTs to form up into waves and make
their own way onto the beaches. °
In reply to the murderous pounding
of the Hagushi beaches by 10 battleships, 9 cruisers, 23 destroyers, and 17 7
gunboats, the Japanese returned only
desultory and light artillery and morta r
fire. Even though the assault wave s
formed up in assembly areas withi n
4 2d MarDiv AR, Anx A–N. In the same
attack, ships' crews sustained casualties of 1
killed, 34 wounded and 10 missing.
e More than 500 planes of the Fifth Fleet
were engaged in troop support missions between 0700 and 1000 on L-Day.
e Medium tanks fitted with T–6 flotation de -
vices were able to proceed to the beach under
their own power, utilizing their tracks fo r
propulsion . The equipment consisted of flotatio n
tanks welded to the outside of the armore d
vehicle, an improvised steering device, electrical bilge pumps, and electrically detonate d
charges to jettison the flotation tanks whe n
they were no longer required and once th e
beach was reached . 6th TkBn SAR, Ph I&II,
pp. 39-41.
range of this fire, neither troops nor invasion craft were hit. During the early
morning hours, the two battalions of th e
420th Field Artillery Group on Keis e
Shima received heavy enemy counterbattery fire, which stopped America n
unloading operations on the reef fo r
four hours but caused no damage.
Lying off each Okinawa invasion
beach were control vessels marking th e
lines of departure (LD) . Landing vehicles quickly formed into waves behin d
the LD and at 0800, when the signa l
pennants fluttering from the masts o f
the control vessels were hauled down ,
the first wave, composed of LVT (A) s
(landing vehicle, tracked (armored) ) ,
moved forward to the beaches in an
orderly manner behind a line of support
craft. Following on schedule, hundred s
of troop-carrying LVTs, disposed in
five to seven waves, crossed the lines o f
departure at regular intervals and
moved determinedly towards the shore .
Despite the ferocity of the prelanding
bombardment, enemy artillery an d
mortars continued scattered but ineffectual fire on the invasion waves as they
made the 4,000-yard run to the beach .
On approaching the shoreline, the
LVT (A) s fired upon suspected targets,
while naval gunfire lifted from the
beach area to hit inland targets. Carrier
fighters that had been orbiting lazily
over the two flanks of the beachhea d
began diving over the landing area and
neutralized it with repeated strafing ,
bombing, and napalming runs.
As the assault waves hit the beaches,
smoke was laid down on the hills east o f
Yontan to prevent enemy observation
of the landing zone. On the other side
of the island, Demonstration Group
112 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
landing craft raced toward the Mina -
toga beaches only to reverse their
course and retire to the transport are a
behind a smoke screen as the fourth
wave crossed the line of departure.
Neither the reef fringing the beache s
nor enemy mortar fire on the beaches
themselves interfered with the successful XXIV Corps landing south of the
Bishi Gawa. The eight Army assault
battalions were landed by six successive
waves of LVTs and moved forward
without opposition .
The sea wall, which had caused som e
concern to XXIV Corps planners, ha d
been breached by naval gunfire. In
anticipation of the early build-up
ashore, engineers, landing in the first
waves, blasted additional beach exits
in those portions of the wall which
remained standing. Upon landing,
the LVT(A)s poured through thes e
breaches, hard on the heels of the infantry, and moved to protect the flanks,
while amphibious trucks (DUKWs) ,
preloaded with 4 .2-inch mortars, and
tanks rolled inland .
Off the Marine landing zone, north of
the Bishi Gawa, the reef was raggedl y
fissured and became smoother only as it
neared the beach. A rising tide floate d
the landing vehicles over a large portion of the reef and the boulders which
fringed it. On the northern flank of the
1st Marine Division, however, the large
circular section of the reef off the Blue
Beaches presented difficulties to the
tractors attempting to cross at that
point, and delayed their arrival at the
beach.
During the approach of IIIAC assaul t
waves to assigned beaches, several instances occurred when inexperienced
wave guide officers failed to follow correct compass courses or when they di d
not guide by clearly recognizable terrai n
features on the shore . Some troops wer e
thus landed out of position . For example, Lieutenant Colonel Bruno A.
Hochmuth's 3d Battalion, 4th Marines
—assigned to Red Beach 1—was lande d
on the right half of Green 2 in the zon e
of the 22d Marines (Colonel Merlin F.
Schneider), and on the rocky coast lin e
between Green 2 and Red 1. (See Map
6 .)
Elements of Colonel Edward W.
Snedeker's 7th Marines were landed i n
relatively insignificant numbers on th e
beach of the 4th Marines (Colonel Alan
Shapley) . On the extreme right flank
of the 1st Marine Division, however, the
fourth wave of RCT–5 was diverte d
across the corps boundary and lande d
on the right flank of the 7th Infantry
Division. The Marine wave consisted
principally of Lieutenant Colonel
Charles W. Shelburne's 1/5 reserve—
Company B—and part of the battalion
command post group. By 0930, a sufficient number of LVTs had been sent t o
pick up all but one lieutenant and two
squads, who did not rejoin their paren t
unit until. L plus 3. 7 The fifth and sixth
waves of the 5th Marines landed on
7 1/5 SAR, Ph I&II, dtd 29Apr45, p . 5, and
Ph III, dtd 9Ju145, hereafter 1/5 SAR. Relating to this mixup in landing beaches, the 1s t
Division Shore Party Officer wrote, "there is a
point here which should not be missed . 1st
MarDiv beaches were designated Blue an d
Yellow and 7th Div's were Purple and Orange
from left to right as you came in from th e
sea. Some of the ships mounting out the 7th
Div did not have Purple and Orange buntin g
and substituted Blue and Yellow ." Col Robert
G. Ballance ltr to CMC, dtd 22Mar55, here -
after Ballance ltr.

114 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
their assigned beaches after the guide
officers of these waves corrected th e
faulty course heading followed by the
fourth wave .
Despite these unexpected deviations
from the landing plan, all the LVT (A)s
spearheading the IIIAC attack reached
the beach by 0830 and all eight assaul t
battalions were ashore by 0900. The
beaches had not been mined and opposition to the landing consisted only of
sporadic mortar and small arms fire.
This resulted in but few casualties and
caused no damage to the LVTs. "With
utter consternation and bewilderment
and with a great deal of relief the assault wave landed against practically
no opposition . " 8
As the assault troops surged up the
terraced slopes behind the beaches and
sped inland, the center of invasion activity shifted from the line of departure to
the transfer line at the edge of the reef.
There, small boat, LVT, and DUKW
control was established to unload sup -
port troops and artillery units on call.
Supporting units continued to pour
ashore during the morning as the attack
progressed against only slight resistance. At the transfer line, reserve infantry elements shifted from ships'
boats into the LVTs which ha d
landed assault troops earlier. Flotationequipped tanks made the beaches unde r
their own power., others were landed at
high tide from LCMs, and the remainder were discharged directly ont o
the reef from LSMs and LSTs. DUKWs
brought the 75mm and 105mm howitzers of the light field artillery battalions directly ashore.
4th. Mar SAR, Ph I&II, pp. 6-7.
All tanks in the 1st , Division assault
wave, landing from LCMs and LCTs,
were on the beach by noon. One exception was a tank that foundered in a reef
pothole . The captain of LST 628, carrying the six T—6 flotation-equipped tank s
of the 1st Tank Battalion (Lieutenant
Colonel Arthur J. Stuart), disregarded
the operation plan and refused to allo w
them to launch until H plus 60 minutes . '
At that time, he set them in the wate r
10 miles off the landing beaches. These
tanks finally reached shore after being
afloat for more than five hours, but two
of them were hung up on the reef because of the ebbing tide . Because the
LSMs carrying Lieutenant Colonel
Stuart's reserve tanks had great difficulty in grounding on the reef on L-Day,
the first tracked vehicle off the ramp of
one was lost in an unseen pothole . Of
the four LSMs employed, two finally
landed their cargo late on L-Day,
another at noon on L plus 1, and the last
on 3 April.
Tanks were landed early in the 6th
Division zone, where each of the thre e
companies of the 6th Tank Battalion
(Lieutenant Colonel Robert L . Denig,
Jr.) employed a different landing procedure. Tanks equipped with flotation
gear swam to the reef, easily negotiated
the rugged coral, continued on to the
beaches, where they jettisoned their
pontoons and became operational by H
plus 29 minutes . The company in LCM s
° In his action report, the LST captai n
stated that he did not hold a complete copy of
the basic Fifth Fleet plan . He also commented
that the plans held aboard his ship were distributed so late that there was insufficient time
for "`adequate planning, preparation and
training.' " Dir, Naval Hist ltr I.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 115
came in at high tide (0930) and landed
without incident. The third compan y
successfully landed directly from th e
LSMs grounded on the reef but forde d
the deep water between the grounding
point and the shore with difficulty. lo
Soon after landing, the accelerated
pace of the 6th Division assault to the
north overextended Colonel Schneider's
22d Marines. Troops were taken from
his left battalion, 2/22 (Lieutenant
Colonel Horatio W. Woodhouse, Jr.) ,
to guard the exposed flank. This, in turn ,
weakened the 22d attack echelon and
gave it a larger front than it could adequately cover. Consequently, a considerable gap developed between the 2d Battalion and the 3d Battalion (Lieutenant
Colonel Malcolm "0" Donohoo), advancing on the right. In less than 20
minutes after the landing, Colone l
Schneider ordered his reserve, 1/2 2
(Major Thomas J. Myers), ashore . Upon
landing, the 1st Battalion (less Company C, remaining afloat as regimental
reserve) was committed in the cente r
of the regimental zone .
Still meeting no opposition while i t
continued the rapid move inland, b y
1000 the 22d Marines found its left
flank unit stretched dangerously thin .
As he pressed the division attack to exploit initial success, General Shepherd
anticipated Schneider's request for reinforcements to cover the exposed flank,
and asked corps to release one BLT o f
the 29th Marines.
During the unopposed 22d Marine s
advance on Hanza, the 4th Marines
moved on Yontan airfield against ligh t
to moderate resistance. Isolated enemy
10 6th TkBn SAR, Ph I&II, pp. 15-16, 39-41.
310-224 0 - 69 - 9
pockets, built around light machine guns ,
slowed the regiment only slightly as it
penetrated several hundred yards inland and made contact on its right with
the 7th Marines at the division boundary. By midmorning, the 4th reached
the airfield and found it unguarded .
Only intermittent sniper fire coming
from beyond the field opposed the 4th
Marines as it swept across the air facility and secured its objective by 1300.
The airfield was found to be essentially
intact, but all buildings had been
stripped and the antiaircraft emplacements contained only dummy guns.
As this rush carried Colonel Shapley' s
regiment beyond adjacent units, a wid e
gap developed between its left flank and
the right of the 22d Marines, then in th e
vicinity of Hanza . Shapley's regiment
jumped off again at 1330 against onl y
light resistance on its left. Tanks were
called in to reduce several cave position s
in this area. After these positions wer e
neutralized, the attack continued slowl y
through rugged, wooded terrain . In
order to maintain contact with the 7th
Marines and to rectify the overextende d
condition of the 4th, 2/4 was release d
from division reserve at 1500 and immediately committed on the regiment 's
left to establish contact with the 22d
Marines.
Because the division left flank wa s
still dangerously exposed, General
Shepherd regained 1/29 (Lieutenant
Colonel Jean W. Moreau) from corps.
Released by IIIAC at 1300, the battalio n
landed at 1500 and, with its left flank
anchored on Green Beach 1, completed
tying in with 22d Marines at 1700.
The 1st Marine Division, to the
south of the 6th, met with the same sur-
116 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
prising lack of resistance . By 0945 on
the division left, Colonel Snedeker's 7t h
Marines had advanced through the village of Sobe, a first priority objective ,
and the 5th Marines (Colonel John H.
Griebel) was 1,000 yards inland standing up. With the beaches clear, and in
order to avoid losing any troops as a
result of anticipated enemy air attack s
against the congested transport area, th e
division reserve was then ordered
ashore. Colonel Kenneth B. Chappell's
1st Marines embarked two BLTs, and
the third was to land as soon as transportation became available.
Reserve battalions of both assault
regiments were picked up by LVTs at
the transfer line and shuttled to the
beach before noon. The 3d Battalion, 7th
Marines (Lieutenant Colonel Edward
H. Hurst), landed in the center of the
regimental zone of action and the n
moved to the rear of Lieutenant Colone l
Spencer S. Berger's 2/7, the left flank
unit. At 1400, 3/5 was positioned 400
yards behind 1/5 on the division right
boundary. When the 5th Marines reserve was moved up behind the assault
battalions, the commanding officer of
3/5, Major John A. Gustafson, went
forward to reconnoiter. An hour later,
at 1500, his group was fired on by a
small bypassed enemy pocket an d
Gustafson was wounded and evacuated.
His executive officer, Major Martin C .
Roth, took over temporarily until 4
April, when Lieutenant Colonel John C .
Miller, Jr., assumed command. 1 1
Thus disposed in depth with its reserve elements echeloned to guard th e
11 3d Bn, 5th Mar SAR, 1-21Apr45, dtd
30Apr45, and 22Apr-22Jun45, dtd 10Ju145,
hereafter 3/5 SAR.
flanks, the 1st Division continued its
steady advance over the rolling checkerboard terrain. In addition to having developed the numerous caves that honeycombed the many hillsides in the zone ,
the Japanese had begun to organiz e
other positions throughout the area an d
the Marines encountered innumerabl e
field fortifications in varying stages of
development. These defenses, however,
were only held by small, scattered
groups of service troops and hom e
guards. According to a postwar Japanese source, these troops comprise d
" . . . a hastily organized motley unit . . .
facing extreme hardship in trying to
achieve an orderly formation ." 1 2
The principal bridge over the Bish i
Gawa below Hiza was undamaged and
standing, 13 and local defense forces had
made little or no effort to destroy the
narrow bridges that spanned lesser
streams. What proved a greater hindrance to the advance than the desultory
enemy attempts at halting it was wha t
one observer described as "an excellen t
network of very poor roads." 1 4
By 1530, the majority of IIIAC sup -
porting troops and artillery was ashore .
One howitzer of Colonel Robert B .
Luckey's 15th Marines and three of th e
11th Marines (Colonel Wilburt S.
Brown) were lost when the DUKWs
carrying them foundered on the reef,
but the remaining divisional artillery of
IIIAC was landed successfully . Even
12 Okinawa Operations Record, p . 69 .
"
In commenting on this section, Brigadier
General Robert G. Ballance, the shore part y
officer of the 1st Marine Division, noted tha t
the "bridge was a stone arch affair, dating
back around 1200 A.D." Ballance ltr.
14 1st MarDiv SAR, pt VII, pp. 1-2.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 117
though the artillery arrived early, a
combination of the rapid infantr y
advance and the resulting strain on com -
munications made it difficult for forward observers to register their battalions. Corps artillery reconnaissanc e
parties began landing at 1300, and
found that "selection of position area s
from map and photo study proved suitable in every case ."1 5
The advance was halted between 1600
and 1700, and the attacking infantr y
dug in, established contact all along the
IIIAC line, and carried out extensiv e
patrolling to the front . To maintain the
impetus of the attack of his division o n
L-Day, General Shepherd had committed his entire reserve early. The 6th
Marine Division remained in good shap e
and was well disposed to resume the advance on the 2d. Both the 4th and 22d
Marines still maintained a company in
reserve, while the corps reserve (29th
Marines, less 1/29) was located northwest of Yontan airfield, in the vicinity
of Hanza, after its landing at 1535 .
General del Valle's division was unable to close the gap on the corps
boundary before dark and halted some
600 yards to the rear of the 7th Infantry Division on the right. 16 A company was taken from the reserve battalion of the 5th Marines and put into a
15 Henderson ltr. The same source stated :
"The [Japanese] failure to fight for the beach -
head never gave us a chance to see how well
the artillery would have performed in th e
assault phase. I am convinced however that it
would have been the best field artillery suppor t
of the war. "
le LtCol John D. Muncie ltr to CMC, dt d
27Mar47.
blocking position to close the open flank.
Two 1st Marines battalions, 1/1 and
2/1 (commanded by Lieutenant Colonels James C. Murray, Jr., and James
C. Magee, Jr., respectively) , landed at
1757. Lieutenant Colonel Stephen V.
Sabol's 3d Battalion was on the transfe r
line at 1800 but, unable to obtain LVTs,
remained in the boats all night. The 1st
Battalion was attached to the 5th
Marines for administrative control an d
moved inland to Furugen, while 2/1 ,
similarly attached to the 7th Marines,
dug in east of Sobe by 1845 . 1 7
Artillery support for the Marine infantry was readily available by night -
fall . The 15th Marines had established
its fire direction center (FDC) by 1700,
and its batteries were registered by
1830. All of Colonel Brown's artillery
battalions were prepared to fire nigh t
defensive missions, though two of the
11th Marines battalions did not complete their registration because of the
late arrival of spotter planes . Since
enemy action was confined to unsuccess -
ful attempts at infiltration of the line s
and to intermittent mortar and machine
gun fire in the 4th Marines sector, there
were relatively few requirements for
artillery support that first night on
Okinawa.
ICEBERG's L-Day had been successful beyond all expectations. In conjunction with the extended initial advance
of IIIAC, XXIV Corps had capture d
Kadena airfield by 1000, driven inland
to an average depth of 3,500 yards, an d
advanced south along the east coast to
the vicinity of Chatan. On 1 April, th e
17 Col Russell E. Honsowetz ltr to CMC, dt d
90ct54, hereafter Honsowetz ltr.
118 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
Tenth Army had landed an estimated
50,000 troops in less than eight hours
and established a beachhead that was
15,000 yards wide and varied from
4,000-5,000 yards in depth. (See Map
7.) For the entire day's operations by
four assault divisions, casualties were
reported to Admiral Turner as 28
killed, 104 wounded, and 27 missing .
PROGRESS INLAND
Following a relatively quiet night ,
which was punctuated only by sporadi c
sniper, machine gun, and mortar fire,
Tenth Army units resumed the attack
on L plus 1 at 0730. Perfect weather
again prevailed, as the early morning
was cool and a bright sun soon dispelle d
the ground fog and haze to provide unlimited visibility. While no artillery
preparation preceded the jump off on
the second day, all guns were availabl e
on call for support fires, and registration of all battalions, including those of
the 11th Marines, had been completed .
Carrier planes were on station at 0600
before the attack began.
With the resumption of the advance,
the 6th Marine Division continued to
the east, while its left flank unit, 1/29 ,
began clearing operations to Zamp a
Misaki. Admiral Turner wanted th e
point captured as a site for a radar station. He also wanted the Black Beache s
uncovered so that unloading operation s
could begin. Throughout the day, the
22d Marines and 1/29 advanced rapidly
against light resistance . By 1025, the
latter unit had seized Zampa Misaki an d
found that the beaches there were unsuitable for use by IIIAC.
Major Anthony Walker's 6th Reconnaissance Company was then ordere d
to reconnoiter the beaches on the north
coast of Zampa and the villages of
Nagahama and Maeta Saki . Walker's
scouts accomplished this mission befor e
noon without opposition, and whil e
doing so, encountered 50 civilians, who
were taken into custody and transferre d
to stockades. The Nagahama beach was
reported satisfactory for landing sup -
plies.
On the 6th Division right, the 4th
Marines advanced through rugged terrain, meeting intermittent enemy re -
action. As the day wore on, however,
pockets of stiff resistance were increasingly encountered, and at 1100, 3/4 came
up against strong enemy positions, consisting of mutually supporting caves on
both sides of a steep ravine . When the
leading platoon entered the draw, it was
met by a hail of small arms fire so heavy
that the Marines could not bring out
their 12 wounded until four hours later .
"Every means of painlessly destroying
the strongpoint was unsuccessfully
tried and it was finally taken by a typical `Banzai' charge with one platoo n
entering the mouth of the draw and one
platoon coming down one side of the
two noses that formed the pocket ." 1 8
The speed of the second day's advance
again caused the assault units to become
overextended. About midmorning, Colonel Shapley reported that there was a
gap between his regiment and the 7t h
Marines, which he believed to be some
1,000 yards south of the division bound4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, p . 8.

120 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
ary,19 and an adjustment was requested
by Shepherd. The 7th was ordered to
cover the gap, a movement that place d
it ahead of 1/4. In sideslipping back to
its own zone, 1/4 met with stiff opposition from strongly entrenched enemy
forces similar to those that had held u p
3/4. With the aid of a platoon of tanks,
this position was finally reduced . The
two battalions killed some 250 Japanes e
in the course of the day's operations before the 4th Marines attack ceased at
1830, some 1,000 yards ahead of the L
plus 3 line.
During the day, Major Paul F.
Sackett's 6th Engineer Battalion re -
paired the strips on Yontan and place d
one taxiway in good enough condition
to permit a VMO–6 spotter plane to land
at 1500. By 4 April, all three Yontan
""Lack of readily identifiable terrain features made it impossible to quickly identify th e
boundaries of zones of action in the rapid advance. Maps at this time were also poor an d
difficult to follow. Hill 165 [3,600 yards west
of Yontan airfield] and certain towns, however, were unmistakable. [The] 7th Marine s
ZA was approximately 2,000 yards wide. Whil e
there was some slippage to the right all along
the front, I know that 2/7 on the left and
1/7 on the right substantially covered their
[zone of action] . My opinion is that the left
flank of the 7th was not over 400 yards from
the division boundary at any time. The slant
distance from the actual right flank of th e
4th Marines and the left flank of the 7t h
Marines may have been greater as the attacks
of the two regiments were not at an even
rate." BGen Edward W. Snedeker ltr to CMC,
dtd 180ct54, hereafter Snedeker ltr I. "The
maps were not accurate . The 7th felt that the y
were on the boundary and so did the 4th . Who
was right was never determined ." Honsowetz
ltr. "There was a gap, but it never was determined how much or in what area . In any
case it was not a serious gap for a maneuverin g
assault." Snedeker ltr 1965.
runways were ready for emergenc y
landings.
Spearheaded by extensive advance
patrolling, the 1st Marine Division
moved out on L plus 1 unopposed excep t
for the slight interference presented b y
local defense units, which were part of
a force officially designated the 1st
Specially Established Regiment. Activated by the Thirty-second Army on L
minus 4, it was composed of 3,473 airfield service troops and Boeitai, less
than half of whom were armed with
rifles. In addition, the equipment of this
regiment consisted of 55 light machine
guns, and 18 grenade launchers. The
heaviest weapons of this unit were 1 0
heavy machine guns and 5 20mm
dual-purpose machine cannon . For the
most part, the troops were completely
untrained, and even the regular Army
service troops had not been given such
basic infantry training as firing a
machine gun.
When Ushijima pulled his combat
troops south, the 1st Specially Established Regiment had been assigned the
mission of servicing final air traffic o n
the Yontan and Kadena fields. The regiment was to destroy those fields on order
after the Americans had landed an d
then to retire to positions from which it
could deny their use to the invaders.
The 1st Battalion was located in the
6th Division zone ; the 2d and part of
the 3d Battalion in the 1st Marine Division area ; the remainder of the 3d Battalion faced the 7th Infantry Division ;
and the 5th Company of the 12th Independent Infantry Battalion was assembled in regimental reserve at Hanza.
Uniquely enough, upon interrogation of
some troops captured from these organ-
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 121
izations, it was found that not one knew
that he was in this paper organization ,
and only one had ever heard of it. Without exception, the prisoners gave as
their unit the service or home guard
element with which they had served a t
the airfields.
Despite their motley makeup, their
commanding officer, Lieutenant Colone l
Tokio Aoyanagi, determined to employ
them in slowing the advance of the invaders. At 1400 on L-Day, he issued an
order directing all of his battalions to
hold every strongpoint, to carry out
night raids, to destroy all bridges, and
to construct tank obstacles. The colonel
pleaded for "each and every one [to ]
carry out his duty with the conviction
of certain victory." 2 0
His men were poorly armed and
mostly leaderless. Moreover, they lacke d
communications. When the escape
routes to the organized forces in the
south were cut off, therefore, this haphazardly organized group collapsed.
The greater portion of these troop s
apparently fled to the northern hills,
while a few, undoubtedly, escaped to the
south ; 26 were captured and 663 killed
by the 1st Marine Division alone. Most
of those who remained in the combat
area quickly divorced themselves from
the military, but other operated a s
snipers or guerrillas dressed in civilian
attire.
Reliable intelligence was meager an d
hard to come by owing to the lack o f
contact with the enemy regular forces.
As tactical operations developed rapidly
2° "1st Specially Established Regiment Oper O
A2, dtd 1Apr45," in CinCPac-CinCPOA Bu l
107-45, Translations and Interrogations No.
28, dtd 14May45, pp. 12-13.
against light opposition, hundreds of
dazed civilians filtered through the line s
and into the paths of the assault forces.
When the Marines met these Okinawans, they interrogated, screened,
and sent natives back to division stockades. Attempts to obtain information o f
the enemy from the older inhabitants
were stymied because of the difficultie s
imposed in translating the Okinawan
dialect. Younger natives of high school
age, who had been forced to learn Japanese by the Nipponese overlords, proved
to be a lucrative source of information,
however.
Even though most civilians were cooperative with the Americans, they
could provide very little information of
immediate tactical importance. Nonetheless, the Okinawans confirmed th e
picture of the Japanese withdrawal to
the south., clarified the presence or absence of units suspected of being in th e
area, aided in establishing an order of
battle, and revealed the general and
specific areas to which the rest of the
civilian population had fled .
Military government personnel soon
discovered that local inhabitants had
moved with all their belongings to caves
dug near their homes to escape from th e
path of war. Although interpreters roving the area in trucks mounted wit h
loudspeakers assured the natives that
they would be saved and induced them
to leave their refuges voluntarily, other
Okinawans continued to believe Japanese propaganda and viewed the American "devils" as barbarians and cutthroats. In many cases, particularly in
isolated regions, it was necessary fo r
language and civil affairs personnel "to
enter the caves and verbally pry the
122 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
dwellers loose ." 21 Sometimes this resulted in troops coming upon a tragi c
scene of self-destruction, where a father,
fearing for the lives of his family an d
himself at the hands of the invaders,
had killed his wife and children and
then had committed suicide . Fortunately, there were no instances of mass
suicide as there had been on Saipan o r
in the Keramas.
2 2
Specifically organized patrols wer e
dispatched to round up civilians and
transfer them to stockades in areas predesignated in military government
plans. These patrols were often accompanied by language officers searchin g
for documents, but most of the materia l
found was of no military value . When a
rewarding find was made, pertinent information was orally translated to
the regimental S-2, who took down matters of local significance . The paper was
then sent to the division G–2 language
section .
The 1st Division learned from documents captured in its zone that the
Japanese authorities had actively conscripted Okinawan males between the
ages of 17 and 45 since the bombings of
10 October 1944. After their induction,
these men were placed into three type s
of organizations ; regular Thirty-Second
Army units, specially organized engineer units, and labor forces. In order t o
neutralize the effects that might resul t
from the presence of such a large hostil e
group in its midst, the Tenth Army de-
'1 1st MarDiv SAR, pt VIII, p . 2.
22 For examples of Japanese-induced mass
hysteria among civilians see : Appleman, et. at. ,
Okinawa Battle, p. 58; Maj Carl W. Hoffman,
Saipan: The Beginning of the End (Washing -
ton : HistDiv, HQMC, 1950), p . 245.
creed that all able-bodied males betwee n
the ages of 15 and 45 years were to b e
detained for further screening togethe r
with bona fide prisoners of war.
2 3
Special agents from Army Counterintelligence Corps detachments assigned the division assisted the Marines
in interrogating and screening each mal e
Okinawan detainee . Eventually, after
their clearance by the American agents,
cooperative and intelligent natives were
enlisted to aid in the interrogations.
Specially qualified Okinawans were
moved to liberated villages and districts to serve as informants for the
Island Command .
Even more of a problem than the in -
ability of the Marines to come to grips
with the enemy or their difficulty in obtaining usable intelligence was the dislocation of the logistical plan and the
subsequent strain on supporting units
that resulted from the unopposed and
rapid troop advance . The logistics annex
of the operation plan had been based o n
the premise that the landings would b e
stubbornly contested, and unloading
priorities were assigned accordingly. When the uncontested landing permitted
the immediate debarkation of troops
who had not been scheduled ashore unti l
2 or 3 April, landing craft originally
allocated to move cargo were diverted
for this troop movement. As a result,
the unloading of supplies was delayed
on L-Day.
Because the road net ranged in degree
from primitive to nonexistent and in
""The wisdom of these precautions wa s
illustrated by several incidents which confirme d
our suspicions. Many a Kimono hid a uniform,
and a number of civilians were found to b e
armed." 1st MarDiv SAR, pt VIII, p. 7.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 123
order to prevent traffic congestion,
LVTs were not sent too far inland . The
front lines were supplied, therefore, by
individual jeeps, jeep trailers, weasels,
and carrying parties, or a combination
of all four. As forward assault elements
moved farther inland, the motor transport requirement became critical and a
realignment of unloading priorities was
necessary. As a consequence, the unload -
ing of trucks from AKAs and APAs wa s
given the highest priority.
By the night of L plus 1, all of the
units supported by the 11th Marine s
had moved beyond artillery range, an d
Colonel Brown's regiment had to displace forward. The movement of 1/11
(Lieutenant Colonel Richard W. Wallace), in particular, was long overdue .
Artillery displacements were not yet
possible, however, since organic regimental transportation had not lande d
and no other prime movers were available. Two battalions were moved forward on L plus 2 by shuttle movements
and an increased transportation capability, which resulted when more trucks
came ashore and were made available.
The other two battalions moved up o n
the 4th. Although it had been planne d
to have the bulk of Corps Artillery on
the island by the end of L plus 1, and
all by the end of L plus 2, it was no t
until 10 April that General Nimmer' s
force was completely unloaded . "This
melee resulted from the drastic change
in unloading priorities." 24 Fortunately,
unloading operations were improved by
L plus 2.
Engineer battalions organic to the
Marine divisions were generally re -
24 Henderson ltr.
lieved of mine removal tasks by the unfinished state of Japanese defenses, but
there was no Ietup in their workload.
Owing to the accelerated movement forward, the "narrow and impassabl e
stretches of roads [and] lack of roads
leading into areas in which operation s
against the enemy were being con -
ducted, the engineers were called upon
more than any other supporting
unit." 25 A priority mission assigned to
the engineers was the rehabilitation o f
the airfields after they had been captured. Their early seizure permitted
work to begin almost immediately, and
after the engineers had reconditione d
Yontan airfield beyond merely emergency requirements, the first fourengine transports arrived from Guam
on 8 April to begin evacuating th e
wounded . 2 5
The only real problem facing General del Valle's units during the secon d
day ashore, and one that tended to check
a more rapid advance, was "the difficulty of supply created by the speed with
which our units were moving and by
lack of good roads into the increasing
rough terrain." 27 In viewing the lac k
of any formidable resistance to eithe r
one of his assault divisions, General
Geiger gave both of them permission to
advance beyond the L plus 5 line without further orders from him.
25 4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, p . 29.
26 Blakelock ltr. This source continues :
"These planes were required to make the re -
turn flight to Guam without refueling at Okinawa due to the shortage of AvGas ashore t o
refuel the planes. Okinawa had five flights
daily from Guam on a nonfueling basis until
12 April, when 500 gal/plane was furnishe d
for the return flight. "
27 1st MarDiv SAR, chap VII, OpAnx, p . 4.
124 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
BEWILDERED CIVILIANS wait to be taken to military government camps in the
wake of the swift American advance across the island . (USMC 117288)
TWO MARINES of the 6th Division safeguard a young Okinawan until he can be
reunited with his family. (USMC 118933)
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 125
By 1500 of L plus 1, the progress of
the 5th Marines had caused its zone of
action to become wider, and in order t o
secure the division right flank and maintain contact with the 7th Infantry Division, the 1st and 2d Battalions of th e
1st Marines were echeloned one behin d
the other on the corps boundary. Upon
landing that morning, 3/1 moved inland
to a point east of Sobe and remained
there in division reserve .
As the 1st Marine Division had not
yet located the center of the enemy defenses or determined his strength, "th e
weakness of the resistance . . . [remained] a source of astonishment" to
General del Valle. 28 During the day,
attempts at infiltration and the occasional ambushing of patrols by smal l
hostile groups had little effect on th e
tactical situation. When the troops du g
in at 1600, the division position wa s
stabilized for the night on a line generally conforming to the L plus 5 line in
the 7th Marines zone, while the 5th wa s
slightly short of it.
To search out enemy positions, the 1st
Reconnaissance Company (1st Lieutenant Robert J. Powell) was ordered to
scout the division zone on 3 April, taking a route that followed along th e
corps boundary to the base of th e
Katchin Peninsula on the east coast. On
this same day, the assault regiments
were to continue the attack with an advance to the L plus 10 line. Because
there had been only slight activity on
the 1st Division front during L plus 1,
the 11th Marines fired only five missions. While night defensive fires were
28 LtGen Pedro A. del Valle ltr to CMC, dt d
29Sep54, hereafter del Valle ltr.
planned for the second night ashore ,
they were not called for.
On this day in the XXIV Corps zone ,
the Army divisions also were able t o
exploit unexpectedly light resistance .
The 7th Infantry Division had reached
the east coast at Tobaru overlookin g
Katsuren Wan (Bay), effectively cutting the island in half and severing the
enemy line of communications . Units of
the 96th Division had advanced to the
east and south, and succeeded in penetrating irregularly defended positions,
some of which consisted merely of road
mines and booby-trapped obstacles. At
the end of L plus 1, General Bradley' s
front lines extended from the vicinity
of Futema on the west coast to approximately one mile west of Unjo in the
east.
By the close of 2 April, all assault
division command posts had been estab -
lished ashore, and the beachhead and
the bulk of the high ground behind th e
landing beaches firmly secured . Enemy
observation of Tenth Army movemen t
and dispositions was thus limited, an d
any land-based threat to unloading
operations removed .
Commenting on the conduct of
Marine operations for the two days,
General Buckner signalled General
Geiger :
I congratulate you and your command
on a splendidly executed landing and substantial gains in enemy territory. I have
full confidence that your fighting Marine s
will meet every requirement of this campaign with characteristic courage, spirit ,
and efficiency . 2 9
During the night of 2—3 April, enemy
activity was confined to sporadic sniper,
29 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II, 3Apr45.
126 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
machine gun, mortar, and artillery fire,
and intermittent infiltration attempts
by individuals and small groups. Undeterred by this harassment, General
Geiger's corps jumped off at 0730 on the
3d and again found slight opposition t o
the attack.
The 6th Marine Division resumed the
offense in the same lineup with which
it had ended the previous day . (See Map
7.) Both the 4th and 22d Marines advanced an average of more than 7,00 0
yards through difficult and heavil y
broken terrain to seize the dominating
Yontan hill mass and the division objective beyond. While the 22d Marines
moved forward, 1/29 patrols covere d
the entire Zampa Misaki without discovering any enemy troops on the
peninsula. There was no repetition o f
the fierce clashes experienced by the 4th
Marines the preceding two days.
Throughout the day, the division wa s
supported by tanks, which operated
along the hazardous narrow trails existing on the precipitous ridge tops to th e
front.
By midmorning, the axis of advanc e
of the 6th Division began to swing to
the north as the towns of Kurawa and
Terabaru were gained. Scattered rearguard action from withdrawing enem y
troops was the only resistance en -
countered by the 22d Marines advancing on Nakadomori. In order to develop
the situation on the division front and
to determine the nature of Japanese
defenses in the Ishikawa Isthmus, General Shepherd ordered his reconnaissance company to scout the coastal road
from Kurawa to Nakadomori, and, at
that point, to cross the isthmus to
Ishikawa. Supported and transported
by a reinforced platoon from the 6th
Tank Battalion, the tank-infantry reconnaissance force completed the assignment and returned to its lines be -
fore nightfall. In the course of the
patrol, the Marines made no enemy contacts and were fired upon only once
from the vicinity of Ishikawa .
While 1/4, the right battalion, had
relatively easy going most of the day,
3/4 on the left lagged behind because of
the increasingly difficult terrain. When
the division attack ceased at 1700, General Shepherd's troops were tied in with
the 1st Division nearly a mile northeast
of Kubo.
Following its sweep of Zampa Misaki ,
Lieutenant Colonel Moreau's 1/29 occupied new reserve positions east of
Yontan airfield from which it could sup -
port either division assault regiment.
At 2000, when IIIAC warned of an imminent enemy airborne attack, Moreau
was reinforced with a tank company ,
which was deployed to defend the airfield by 2300 ; no Japanese paratroops
or airborne infantry landed that night.
The only notable enemy activity experienced by the 1st Division during the
hours of darkness, 2–3 April, occurre d
in the 7th Marines sector where th e
Japanese attempted extensive infiltration. In the fire fight that ensued, 7
Marines were killed and 7 wounded ,
while approximately 20–25 of th e
would-be infiltrators perished.
This brief flurry was not an indication of an imminent major engagement,
for when del Valle's three combat teams
pushed forward on 3 April they met
only light opposition on the left and
virtually none on the right . "Our everwidening zone of action prohibited the
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 127
`hand-in-hand' advance of some small
island operations and our units were
able to maintain contact and clear their
areas only by patrolling to the flanks
and front." 30 With the resumption o f
the advance, motorized units of the 1st
Reconnaissance Company began a series
of patrols which were to encompass
almost all of the division zone of action.
In the morning, the Ikebaru-Napunj a
area was reconnoitered, after which th e
company was ordered to proceed down
the Katchin Peninsula. Completing this
mission by 1300, Lieutenant Powell's
scouts were ordered up the east coast
to Hizaonna and to return to divisio n
lines before dark. During the entire
trip the only sign of enemy activity wa s
a lightly held tank trap.
All units of the division were ordere d
to halt at 1700 on ground most favorable for defense . On the left, the 7th
Marines had pushed forward against
moderate opposition over increasingl y
difficult terrain. As the regimenta l
commander later stated :
The movement from the west coast landing beaches of Okinawa across the islan d
to the east coast was most difficult becaus e
of the rugged terrain crossed. It was physically exhausting for personnel who had
been on transports for a long time . It als o
presented initially an almost impossibl e
supply problem in the Seventh's zone of
action because of the lack of roads. 3 1
Despite these hardships, Snedeker's
troops gained 2,700 yards of enemy
territory and dug in for the night afte r
overrunning a strongpoint from which
heavy mortar, 20mm, and small arms
30 1st MarDiv SAR, chap VII, OpAnx, p . 5.
31 Col Edward W. Snedeker ltr to CMC, dtd
27Mar47, hereafter Snedeker ltr 1947 .
fire had been received . Shortly thereafter, Colonel Snedeker received permission to exploit what appeared to be
an apparent enemy weakness and to
continue the attack after the rest of the
division had ended it for the day. He
then ordered his reserve battalion to
pass between 1/7 and 2/7 and advanc e
towards the village of Hizaonna, on th e
high ground overlooking the east
coast. 3 2
The major fighting in this advance
occurred when the 81mm mortar
platoon was unable to keep up with th e
rest of 3/7. Company K, following the
mortars, became separated from the
main body upon reaching a road fork
near Inubi after night had fallen . When
he became aware of the situation, Lieu -
tenant Colonel Hurst radioed the company to remain where it was and to di g
in after its repeated attempts to rejoin
the battalion were defeated by darkness
and unfamiliar terrain. An estimated
platoon-sized enemy group then engaged the Marines in a heavy fire fight,
which continued through the night as
32 1st MarDiv G—3 Jnl, 3Apr45 ; Col Edwar d
H. Hurst, interview with HistBr, G—3 Div,
HQMC', dtd 3Mar55 . "The forced march of over
three miles of the Third Battalion, Seventh
Marines to Hizaonna, late on 3 April is note -
worthy. Orders for the march were not issued
until about 1430 on that date . Information received from the Division Reconnaissance Company indicated no substantial enemy strength
on the east coast in the Seventh's zone . What
might be encountered from the front line to
the east coast was unknown. The march was
made over rugged unfamiliar terrain, with the
probable expectancy of meeting enemy forces
at any time, and it resulted in advance elements, including the battalion CO reaching
Hizaonna at 1830, 3 April . Hizaonna was at
that time well beyond our front lines. . . . "
Snedeker ltr 1947.
128 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
the Japanese effectively employed
mortars, machine guns, and grenades
against the isolated unit . By noon on 4
April, a rescue team from 3/7 was abl e
to bring the situation under control an d
the company was withdrawn after having sustained 3 killed and 24 wounded . 3 3
With its right flank anchored o n
Nakagusuku Wan, 1/1 held a line sealing off two-thirds of the Katchi n
Peninsula . The 2d Battalion, 1st
Marines, meeting negligible resistance
from armed civilians., occupied the high
ground immediately west of Gushikawa ,
where the eastern shore could be covered by fire . During the day's gains,
"supply had been almost nonexistent
and the troops were without water an d
still depending on the food they landed
with." 3 4
The advance of the 5th Marine s
gained momentum throughout the day,
the troops having met only a four-man
enemy patrol . The 1st Battalion reached
Agina, where 3/5 was committed on the
right to contact 2/1. One thousand
yards away, on the left of the regiment
2/5 occupied the village of Tengan and
then advanced to the east coast of Okinawa. 3
" Hurst interview, op . cit. ; 1st MarDiv Interviews, Co K, 7th Mar. This last source consists
of a series of interviews conducted by Sergeants Kenneth A. Shutts and Paul Trilling,
historians assigned to the 1st Marine Divisio n
for the Okinawa operation . These interviews
form a valuable record of the importan t
actions of the campaign at the small-unit level .
'* 1st Mar SAR, p . 6.
""This was accomplished by 1700 on 3
April. 2/5, commanded by LtCol W . E. Benedict, had marched approximately eight miles
over hilly country since 0800 when they left
their 2 April position near Ishimine ." Col John
H. Griebel ltr to CMC, dtd 18Oct54.
By the end of L plus 2, the 1st Marin e
Division had driven to the coast, advancing 3,000—5,000 yards, and thus
placed its lines 8—13 days ahead of the
ICEBERG schedule . The 6th Division ,
meanwhile, had moved through difficult
and heavily broken terrain honeycombed with numerous caves to gain
3,500—7,000 yards of enemy ground in
its zone .
At dark on 3 April, the 6th Division
left flank was anchored at the base of
the Ishikawa Isthmus, thereby placin g
the Tenth Army 12 days ahead of
schedule in this area. During this same
day, the XXIV Corps had reached th e
eastern coast in force and its units ha d
begun reorganizing and regrouping fo r
the attack to the south. The 7th Infantry
Division had secured the Awashi Peninsula, and pivoting southward in a coordinated move with the 96th Division ,
secured an additional 3,000 yards befor e
the end of the day. In the vicinity of
Kuba-saki, the 32d Infantry came up
against its first real opposition on Okinawa, when it made contact with an
enemy force estimated at 385 men. The
regiment overran the enemy positio n
and finally took Kuba-saki. After completing the wheel to the right, the 96t h
Division reorganized its front lines,
putting its units in position for the
southerly drive .
While observation planes, OYs (Consolidated-Vultee Sentinels), operate d
from Yontan airfield during the day,
the 6th Engineer Battalion and the 58th
Seabees continued working on the field .
An F6F (Grumman Hellcat) from th e
carrier Hancock made an emergency
landing at 1110, and the pilot reported
that, in his opinion, the runway could
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 129
satisfactorily accommodate all types of
carrier planes. The other runways wer e
expected to be operational for fightertype aircraft by noon on the 4th.
Because of the very favorable situation that had developed during the day ,
General Buckner removed all restrictions he had placed on movement past
the L plus 10 line and ordered IIIAC to
seize the L plus 25 line at the earliest
possible time. Geiger then ordered the
6th Marine Division to continue the
attack on 4 April and to take the L plus
15 line, prepared to continue the advance to the L plus 20 line. General de l
Valle's division was ordered to advance
to the L plus 20 line . (See Map 7 . )
The continuing cool and clear weather
on 4 April again served as a welcome
change from the torrid humidity of th e
Philippines and the Solomons. Following a quiet night, broken only by th e
fighting in the Inubi area, the IIIAC
jumped off on schedule at 0730 on L
plus 3.
As the 6th Division pushed forward,
no enemy hindered the 4th and 22d
Marines advance to the L plus 15 line .
General Geiger's reserve, the 29th
Marines (Colonel Victor F . Bleasdale) ,
less its 1st Battalion, had reverted to
division control earlier, and Shepherd
assigned it as his reserve . When it became apparent that the day's objectives
would be reached by noon, the assault
regiments were ordered to continue beyond the L plus 15 line to additionally
assigned division objectives.
With all three battalions in the assault, the 22d Marines reached their
Phase I objective at 1250 . Organized a s
a fast tank-infantry column, Lieutenant
Colonel Woodhouse's 2/22 sped up the
west coastal road. All the while, he sent
patrols inland along the route to maintain contact with 1/22 patrol columns
in the interior of the regimental attack
zone. On the right, the 3d Battalion
reached Ishikawa before noon, having
gradually pinched out the 4th Marine s
when that regiment reached the coast
at about the same time. Colonel Shapley
was then ordered to reconsolidate his
unit in the Ishikawa area, and to pre -
pare to support either division flank
unit in the attack northward. In the
course of the morning operations, exceedingly rough terrain, and the logistical support problems it posed, created
greater obstacles to the advance than
did the enemy.
At 1300, the attack up the Ishikawa
Isthmus was resumed, with RCT–22 and
1/29 attached 36 taking over the entir e
division front from the west to the east
coast. Advance was rapid in the afternoon as patrols met only scattered resistance until 1730, when a Japanes e
strongpoint, built around several heav y
machine guns, fired upon a 3/22 patro l
north of Yaka . Night defenses were not
taken up until after this obstacle wa s
reduced by units of Donohoo's 3/22 an d
Moreau's 1/29, the latter having assumed the 1/22 sector when Majo r
Myers' unit was placed in regimental
reserve.
When the 6th halted for the day, its
Marines had advanced over 7,500 yards
and held a line that stretched across the
isthmus from a point just south o f
Yakada on the west coast to Yaka o n
ae After being relieved of its Yontan airfiel d
defense mission, 1/29 moved to Nakadomari
in the morning and was attached to the 22 d
Marines at 1155, when it moved up to the lines.
130 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
the east. In this day's fighting, the increasingly rugged terrain forecast th e
difficulties to be faced during the march
northward. Supply lines were strained
almost to their limit as they were extended across numerous ravines and
steep valleys in the mountainous interior. Despite this, the troops were fe d
and logistical replenishment continued
as the division prepared to continue the
advance the next day.
With the exception of the few enem y
positions encountered in its push to th e
east coast, the 1st Marine Division still
did not have a clear picture of what
Japanese defenses lay ahead on 4 April .
As on the day before, the attack jumped
off without artillery preparation. Rapid
progress with little resistance was th e
general order, except on the left where
the 7th Marines was still busy with the
enemy in the vicinity of Inubi . The 2d
Battalion reached the east coast by 113 0
and, shortly thereafter, made firm con -
tact with the 4th Marines. On the extreme right of the regiment, light bu t
stubborn enemy fire enfiladed the 1/ 7
right flank, and delayed its arrival a t
the coast until 1700 . Because of the
rapid advance of the regiment over a
roadless terrain, Colonel Snedeker requested supply airdrops during the day.
The first drop was made at Hizaonna at
1400, about the same time that Genera l
del Valle's new CP was opening at a
point between Ikebaru and Napunja.
After dark, when the 7th Marines
was consolidating its positions on the L
plus 15 line, the enemy began numerou s
attempts at infiltrating American lines.
Although 45 Japanese were killed as
they probed the regimental positions, it
was difficult to obtain any information
regarding the units represented by
these men, who employed rifles, grenades, bayonets, and sharply pointe d
bamboo spears, which the Marines
promptly dubbed "idiot sticks." 3 7
In the center of the division line, th e
5th Marines reached the shores of
Kimmu Wan by early afternoon, when
the battalions consolidated their positions and established firm contact with
all flanking units. The same day, the 1st
Marines occupied Katchin Peninsula in
orderly fashion by noon and set up its
defenses. Once these two regiments were
in position on the L plus 15 line, they
initiated patrolling to the rear to eliminate bypassed positions, a task in which
the reconnaissance company and the di -
vision reserve (3/1) also participated .
That evening, 3/1 was ordered to take
over the defense of Yontan airfield fro m
the 29th Marines on 5 April . Tentative
plans were formulated to release the 7th
Marines to IIIAC in order to assist th e
6th Division in its drive north . The next
day, the 7th Marines (less Hurst's 3/7,
which was attached to the 5th Marines )
went into IIIAC reserve with orders t o
occupy and defend the village of
Ishikawa, pending further tactical developments. 3 8
In the course of its four-day drive
across Okinawa, the 1st Marine Division found only negligible resistance ,
and this from Japanese units of undetermined strength employing delaying
or rearguard tactics. The question remained : Where was the enemy? The
division had killed 79 Japanese, cap3 ' 1st MarDiv SAR, chap. VII, p. 6.
" "A History of the 7th Marines on Okinawa
Shima," p. 7, end A to Snedeker ltr 1947 ,
hereafter 7th Mar Hist.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 131
tured 2 prisoners of war (POWs), and
encountered 500–600 civilians, who
were quickly interned.
To the south of the 1st Division, th e
tactical situation in the XXIV Corps
zone had been undergoing radical
change. (See Map 7.) Army assault
divisions had aggressively exploited
the initial lack of enemy resistance.
During the same time, they wer e
hampered less by supply difficultie s
than the Marine divisions had been.
Once General Hodge's divisions ha d
wheeled to the right on 3 April for the
drive southward, the lines were reorganized and preparations made for fresh
assault units to effect passage of the
lines the next day. The corps was now
ready for the Phase I southern drive.
The 7th Division pushed forward on
4 April only to meet stiffening resistance from hostile artillery-supported infantry at Hill 165. 39 After a
day's fighting, the division drove th e
Japanese from this dominant piece o f
terrain and continued forward to net
approximately 1,000 yards for the day.
Meanwhile, in the 96th Division zone ,
Army infantry battalions were held up
by reinforced enemy company strongpoints several times during the day .
Heavy Japanese machine gun, mortar,
and artillery fire impeded the advance ,
but by the night of 4 April, the XXIV
Corps had seized the L plus 10 line ,
which had been originally designate d
the southernmost limit of the Tenth
Army beachhead.
ae The reader should keep in mind the fact
that elevation was expressed in meters on the
basic 1 :25,000 map used for Okinawa. When
Hill 165's metric height is converted to feet ,
544, it becomes a sizable hill.
310-224 0 - 69 - 10
An increasing volume of enemy defensive fires was placed on the Army
divisions as they moved out for their
fifth day of ground action. On the XXIV
Corps left flank, resistance came mainl y
from small, scattered enemy groups i n
the hills and ridges bordering the east
coast. In the 96th Division zone to the
right, both assault regiments became
heavily engaged with Japanese outpost
strongpoints during L plus 4 . About
noon, an enemy counterattack wa s
broken up by tank-artillery supported
infantry action just when the right
flank regiment of the 96th, the 383d Infantry, drove unsuccessfully against the
first of a series of prepared ridge positions guarding the approaches to
Kakazu. Four tanks were lost during
the day's fighting, one to a mine and
the others to enemy antitank fire . Compared to the long advances of the previous four days of ground action, the 96th
Division was able to take only 400 yards
on L plus 4 .
THE SWING NORTH 4 0
Although the Japanese forces in the
south offered an increasingly stiff defense as their positions were uncovered ,
the exact whereabouts of the main
enemy strength in the northern part of
the island remained as clouded as wa s
his order of battle. Even though Phase
I of the ICEBERG plan did not specify
any action beyond isolation of the are a
40 Unless otherwise noted, the material i n
this section is derived from : CTF 51 AR ;
Tenth Army AR; ILIAC AR; 1st MarDiv SAR ;
1st MarDiv G–3 Jnl; 1st Mar SAR ; 6th MarDiv SAR, Ph I&II; 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II;
4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II; 22d Mar SAR, Ph
I&II; 29th Mar SAR, Ph I&II.
132 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
above the Ishikawa Isthmus for the
IIIAC, General Buckner believed that
it would be profitable to exploit initial
Marine successes. As a result, on 5
April he ordered IIIAC to reconnoiter
Yabuchi Shima, to conduct a vigorous
reconnaissance northwards to th e
Motobu Peninsula, and to initiate preparations for the early completion of
Phase II. (See Map II, Map Section.)
At the same time that the 6th Division conducted its reconnaissance up
the isthmus, the 1st Division entered a
period devoted primarily to defensive
activity. Supplies were brought up
from the rear, positions were improved
and camouflaged, and all units began
heavy patrolling to the rear. At noon on
L plus 4., a 1st Marines patrol waded
across the reef to Yabuchi Shima from
the Katchin Peninsula, captured five
Boeitai, and reported the presence of
some 350 civilians.
The nearly perfect weather which
had prevailed since L-Day, deteriorate d
with light rain over scattered areas in
the early evening of the 5th . Although
there was no evidence that it was organized, enemy activity behind the line s
increased during the day but only from
small separated groups apparently operating independently of each other. Of
this period, a regimental commander
noted :
There [were] almost daily patrol contacts with well-armed enemy groups. . . .
Some of these groups were wanderin g
aimlessly about while others occupied well
defended, organized, and concealed positions. These patrol operations were extremely valuable in giving to the officers
and men of the regiment added confidenc e
in each other and helped all to reach a peak
of physical perfection . . . independent
patrols . . . often under fire, added greatl y
to the ability of the leaders of smal l
units. 4 1
Because it was necessary to mov e
supplies forward to support the advance, the 6th Division delayed H-Hour
on the 5th until 0900. At that time,
armor-supported infantry columns wer e
dispatched on deep reconnaissances up
both sides of the isthmus, the 6th Reconnaissance Company on the left (west)
flank and Company F, 4th Marines on
the right. The latter advanced 14 miles
before turning back in the late afternoon. During the day, the patrol had
been delayed three times by undefended
roadblocks but met no opposition unti l
the tanks entered Chimu., where two of
the enemy encountered were killed and
a Japanese fuel truck was destroyed .
The drive up the other side of the islan d
was unopposed, but the tanks could not
bypass a destroyed bridge at Onna. The
reconnaissance company, forced to continue on to Nakama by foot, returned to
the lines that evening.
While 6th Division mobile coverin g
forces searched out routes of advance ,
the assault battalions rapidly move d
forward, detaching companies as necessary to reduce bypassed enemy pockets
of resistance inland . Although the terrain had become more difficult to negotiate and the enemy increasingly active ,
the division gained another 7,000 yards.
The 22d Marines held the general lin e
Atsutabaru-Chimu, with the 4th Marines (less 1/4 bivouacked at Ishikawa) 42 located in assembly areas just
behind the front line, prepared to pass
through early the next day. At 1000 on
41 Snedeker ltr 1947 .
" 1/4 SAR, Ph I&II, p . 7.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE
HEAVY UNDERGROWTH on the Zshikawa Isthmus hinders the progress of a 4th
Marines patrol advancing to the north of Okinawa. (USMC 116527)
GRINNING TROOPS of the 29th Marines in M-7s heading for Chuta in their drive
towards Motobu Peninsula. (USMC 117507)
134 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
the 5th, the 29th Marines were release d
to parent control by IIIAC and moved t o
an assembly area in the vicinity of Onna.
As the 6th Division began its dash
up the isthmus on 6 April, the 7th
Marines in corps reserve patrolled the
division zone south of the NakadomariIshikawa line 43 while the 6th Reconnaissance Company mopped up enemy
remnants from this boundary north t o
the Yakada-Yaka line. After its lines had
been passed by the 29th Marines on th e
left and the 4th Marines on the right,
the 22d reverted to division reserve an d
began patrolling back to the area of
responsibility of the reconnaissanc e
company.
Because there were only a few road s
inland, Colonel Shapley planned to move
rapidly up the main road along the
shore, detaching patrols from the advance guard to reconnoiter to their
source all roads and trails into the
mountainous and generally uninhabited
interior. In order to maintain control
during the anticipated rapid advance ,
the regimental march CP moved out i n
a jeep convoy at the head of the main
body. By 1300, 2/4 had been used u p
by the detachment of small patrols, an d
the 3d Battalion then passed through i n
accordance with the prearranged plan
of leapfrogging the battalions. When the
regiment halted for the day at 1600, it
had advanced seven miles, encounterin g
only scattered enemy stragglers. The
supply operations of the 4th Marines
on L plus 5 were hampered more tha n
43 Effective at 0600 on 7 April, the rea r
boundary of the 6th Division was readjusted to
exclude the area south of this line. IIIAC
OperO 2-45, dtd 6Apr45.
usual by the fact that three bridges
along the route had 'been bombed out
earlier by friendly air.
The 4th Marines resumed operations
the next morning deployed in the same
manner in which it had halted the night
before-3/4, 1/4, and 2/4 in that order.
The advance on L plus 6 was virtuall y
a repeat of the previous day as the
regiment continued the push up the east
coast, the lead battalion dissipating its
strength with the dispatch of patrols
into the interior. As a result, the 1st
Battalion (Major Bernard W. Green )
passed the 3d at noon and led the way
to the regimental objective, opposed
only by the difficult terrain, poor roads,
and fumbling enemy defense measures .
Nearly all such efforts failed, however, for in very few instances was the
6th Division drive slowed . Enemy defensive engineering efforts were almost
amateurish, for abatis, with neither
mines nor booby traps attached or wire d
in place, were pushed aside easily by
tank-dozers or bulldozers. Even basic
defensive combat engineering principle s
were violated by the Japanese, who di d
not distribute their mines in roads an d
defiles in depth. They even failed to
cover with either infantry fire or wir e
what they had placed. On the whole, the
mines were little more than a nuisance
and caused but few casualties. 44 Bridges
were often incompletely destroyed by
Japanese demolitions, and Marine engineers were able to save valuable time
by utilizing the remaining structural
members as foundations for new span s
in hasty bridge construction .
44 6th EngrBn SAR, Ph I&II, chap VIII, p . 3.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 135
When the 6th Division drive toward s
the north began, each assault regiment
was assigned one company of the 6th
Engineer Battalion in direct support . A
platoon from each of these companie s
was attached to advance guards to clear
roadblocks, remove mines, and build bypasses for combat vehicles aroun d
demolished bridges. The remainder of
each company followed up the advance,
repairing and replacing bridges an d
widening narrow thoroughfares wherever possible to accommodate two-way
traffic . Following closely in the wake of
the assault regiments, the third company of the engineer battalion further
improved roads and bridges.
At the end of the Ishikawa Isthmus,
where the mountains came down to the
sea, engineer services were in eve n
greater demand as they were required
to widen roads that were little more tha n
trails. 45 The infantry advance was
slowed by the terrain as well as by the
near-physical exhaustion of the patrolling Marines, who had been going u p
and down the thickly covered broke n
ground. Despite this tortuous journey,
the 4th Marines had made another seve n
miles by the late afternoon of 7 April .
Then, just north of Ora, the 1st Battalion set up a perimeter defense with
its flanks secured on the coast . Colone l
Shapley's CP and weapons company
were located in the village itself, whil e
3/4 and 2/4 were deployed in defensive
perimeters at 1,000-yard intervals dow n
the road .
On the west coast, the 29th Marine s
had seized its next objective on 7
46 Ibid., pp. 3-4.
April, again with little difficulty . Advance armored reconnaissance elements
reached Nago at noon to find the town
leveled by naval gunfire, air, and artillery. Before dark, the regiment had
cleared the ruins and organized positions on its outskirts.
As the advance northwards continued ,
the difficult road situation had made i t
imperative to locate forward unloading
beaches from which the 6th Division
could be supplied . (See Map II, Map
Section.) When Nago was uncovered, it
was found suitable for this purpose, and
IIIAC requested the dispatch to this
point of Marine maintenance shippin g
from the Hagushi anchorage. On 9
April, cargo was discharged for the first
time at Nago, relieving the traffic congestion on the supply route up the coast
from Hagushi. 4 6
When planning for ICEBERG, General Shepherd had determined that
Major Walker's company would be employed only in the reconnaissance mission for which it was best fitted and
trained. In effect, the unit was intended
to serve as the commanding general' s
mobile information agency . Pursuant to
this decision, the reconnaissance company, supported and transported by
tanks, was dispatched up the west coast
road ahead of the 29th Marines in an
effort to ascertain the character of
Japanese strength on Motobu . After the
company scouted Nago, it swung up the
coastal road to Awa, and then, after re -
tracing its steps to Nago, crossed th e
base of the peninsula in a northeasterl y
4e Blakelock ltr 1965 .
136 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
direction to Nakaoshi. 47 Before returning to Nago for the night, the patrol uncovered much more enemy activity tha n
had been previously revealed in the
division zone of action and had me t
several enemy groups that were eithe r
destroyed or scattered .
From the very beginning of the drive
to the base of the Motobu Peninsula, th e
15th Marines was employed so that each
assault regiment had. one artillery battalion in direct support and one in general support. The rapidity of the 6th
Division advance during this phase of
the campaign forced the artillery regiment to displace frequently, averaging
one move a day for each battalion and
the regimental headquarters. To keep
up with the fast moving infantry, the
artillerymen were forced to strip their
combat equipment to a bare minimum ;
they substituted radio for wire communications and by leapfrogging units,
managed to keep at least one artillery
battalion in direct support of each assault infantry regiment throughout the
advance up the isthmus. 4 8
Augmenting the 15th Marines, 6t h
Division artillery support was reinforced by the 2d Provisional Field Artillery Group (Lieutenant Colonel Custis
Burton, Jr.) which displaced to positions north of Nakadomari on the ev e
" It was later revealed that, as the 6th
Reconnaissance Company moved westward
toward Awa, the Japanese were close on the
company's northern flank, observing its movement, and holding fire . CMC [Gen Lemuel C.
Shepherd . Jr.] memo to Head, HistBr, G- 3
Div, HQMC, dtd 2Mar55, hereafter Shepherd
memo II; LtCol Anthony Walker ltr to CMC ,
dtd 3Jun55.
" 15th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, chap VII, n.p.
of the drive up the Ishikawa Isthmus.
Four days later, when resistance on
Motobu Peninsula began to stiffen, the
15th Marines was reinforced further by
the attachment of the 1st Armored
Amphibian Battalion as artillery. The
following day, the corps artillery supporting the advance was moved to
Besena Misaki, a promontory at the
southern extremity of Nago Wan, wher e
it remained throughout the period of
Marine operations in the north . 4 8
MOTOBU UNCOVERED
Owing to the lack of intelligence about
the location of the enemy, and a Tent h
Army order to avoid unwarranted destruction of civilian installations unless
there was a clear indication or confirma -
tion of enemy presence, naval gunfire
support was not used extensively in the
drive up the Ishikawa Isthmus. After
5 April, however, all IIIAC naval fir e
support was diverted to the 6th Division
zone of action. As the Marines moved
north, these ships kept pace, firing up
the numerous ravines leading down t o
the beach. Each assault battalion was
furnished a call-fire ship during the day ,
and each regiment was furnished a shi p
to fire illumination at night. 5 °
The Tenth Army gained land-base d
air support when TAF squadrons fro m
MAG–31 and -33 arrived ashore on 7
'° IIIAC Arty AR, pp. 20-21. At this time,
LtCol Burton's group consisted of only th e
Headquarters Battery and the 7th 155mm Gun
Battalion, as the remainder of the IIIAC
Artillery gun and howitzer battalions ha d
passed to XXIV Ccrps control on 7 April . Ibid. ,
p . 19.
'° Ibid., p. 39 .
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE
JAPANESE 105MM GUN captured .in the heart of Mount Yae Take had previously
commanded the entire coastal road along southern Motobu Peninsula . (USMC 122207)
SUICIDE BOATS found at Unten Ko on 10 April by Marines of 2129 . Note warning
that boats had been booby trapped . (USMC 127905)
137
138 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
and 9 April. 51 The 6th Division did not
need them immediately during the first
two weeks in the north, however, for th e
division advance had been rapid an d
suitable targets scarce. Daylight combat air patrols were flown almost as soo n
as the squadrons landed, but strikes i n
support of ground operations did no t
begin until L plus 12, and then they wer e
directed at Japanese targets in the
XXIV Corps zone in the south . As enemy
resistance stiffened on Motobu Peninsula, Marine air was called upon to
destroy emplacements, observation
posts, and troop concentrations. 5 -
After the division had gained the bas e
of the Motobu Peninsula and had ,begu n
extending reconnaissance operations t o
the west on 8 April, aerial observation
and photo studies confirmed the fact
that the enemy had chosen to make his
final stand in the rugged mountains of
the peninsula. In order to reduce this
Japanese bastion, and at the same time
maintain flank security and continue th e
drive to the northernmost tip of Okinawa, General Shepherd needed to re -
orient the axis of operations and re -
deploy his forces. Consequently, the 22 d
Marines was taken out of division re -
serve and set up on a line across the
island from Nakaoshi to Ora to cove r
the right and rear of the 29th Marines
attacking to the west. Assembled nea r
Ora, also, was the 4th Marines, whic h
was positioned to support either the
29th Marines on Motobu or the 22d i n
the north.
" TAF WarD, Apr45 .
52 6th MarDiv SAR, Ph I&II, chap VII, p . 14.
The 6th Division received its first TAF support
missions of the campaign on L plus 16. TAF
Periodic Rpt No. 2, dtd 20Apr45, p. 3.
During the next five days, the 4th an d
22d Marines combed the interior and
patrolled in the north, while the 29th
probed westward to uncover the enemy
defense. 53 On L plus 7, 2/29 move d
northeast from Nago to occupy the small
village of Gagusuku . The 1st Battalion,
initially in reserve, was ordered to send
one company to secure the village of
Yamadadobaru, a mission accomplished
by Company C at 0900. An hour later,
the battalion as a whole was ordered t o
the aid of Company H, 3/29, 54 which
had encountered heavy resistance in th e
vicinity of Narashido . By 1500, 1/29
had converged on this point and, despit e
heavy enemy machine gun and rifle fire ,
had reduced two strongpoints, after
^' In this five-day sparring period "the 29t h
had a platoon of war dogs attached. These dogs
gave an excellent account of themselves.
Twenty-nine alerts were noted by the regimental S—3 section. All [alerts] enabled the
Marine patrol involved to avoid a Japanese
ambush . In one instance a patrol leader chos e
to ignore the dogs and was badly wounded . "
LtCol Angus M. Fraser Ur to CMC, dtd
24Mar55, hereafter Fraser ltr. 2/29 SAR, Ph
I&II, p . 4.
" "Prior to a reorganization of Marine divisions in the spring of 1944, each infantr y
battalion had five companies : headquarters,
weapons, and three rifle companies. When the
weapons companies (D, H, and M) were absorbed [by their respective battalions], the
rifle companies retained their original alphabetical designations, so that the three battalions of a regiment had companies lettered :
1st Bn, A, B, and C ; 2d Bn, E, F, and G ; 3d
Bn, I, K, and L. The 2d and 3d Bns of the 29th
Mar, formed after this reorganization took
place, were lettered straight through in sequence after 1/29. Therefore, the rifle companies of the 29th Mar were A, B, and C i n
the 1st Bn, D, E, and F in the 2d Bn, and G,
H, and I in the 3d Bn ." Nichols and Shaw,
Okinawa Victory, p . 94n.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 139
which Lieutenant Colonel Moreau's me n
dug in for the night.
Intending to locate the main enemy
force on Motobu, the 29th Marines move d
out on 9 April in three columns ; the 3d
Battalion (Lieutenant Colonel Erma A .
Wright) on the left flank, the 2d Battalion (Lieutenant Colonel William G.
Robb) on the right flank, and Moreau' s
1st Battalion up the mountainous center
of the peninsula. All three columns en -
countered opposition almost immediately. This was an indication that the
division may have at last hit the majo r
enemy resistance in the north, and it
was located in the area from Itomi west
to Toguchi.
In the 3/29 zone on the left, roads
were found to be virtually impassable as
a result of effective enemy use of road -
blocks, mines, and demolitions. The 6th
Engineer Battalion reported that from
Nago westward on the Motobu Peninsula the enemy had been even more
destructive. They had demolished every
bridge and blasted numerous tank traps
in the roads. The Japanese had been
careful to place these obstacles at points
where no tank bypass could be constructed. Traps that had been made i n
the narrow coastal roads were put at th e
foot of cliffs where back fill was unavailable. Those in the valleys were alway s
located where the road passed through
rice paddies. When the crater was in a
cliff road, trucks had to travel long distances to obtain fill for the hole . 5 5
In the center, 1/29 was to occupy an d
defend Itomi before nightfall ; about
600 yards short of the objective, however, the battalion was met by a strong
^' 6th EngrBn SAR, Ph I&II, pt VII, p. 4.
enemy force and compelled to dig in fo r
the night in place . The north coast was
patrolled as far as Nakasoni by Robb' s
2d Battalion, which destroyed suppl y
dumps and vehicles and dispersed small
enemy groups. The battalion also scouted
Yagachi Shima with negative results.
The next day, L plus 9, Robb's me n
seized Unten and its harbor, where the
Japanese had established a midget sub -
marine and torpedo boat base. The base
had been abandoned and large amounts
of equipment and supplies were left behind by approximately 150 Japanese
naval personnel, who were reported to
have fled inland to the mountains.
Toguchi, on the other side of the peninsula, was captured by 3/29, which sent
patrols inland to Manna. On 10 April,
1/29 pushed forward through Itomi, an d
on the high ground north of the town i t
uncovered numerous well-prepared positions from which the enemy had fled .
During the first two days of the drive
to clear Motobu Peninsula, frequent enemy contacts were made in the difficult
terrain northwest and southwest of
Itomi . Night counterattacks increased i n
intensity ; one particularly strong attack ,
supported by artillery, mortars, machine
guns, and 20mm dual-purpose cannon ,
struck the 1/29 defense perimeter on the
night of 10-11 April and was not broke n
up until dawn .
Patrols from 2/29 were sent out o n
11 April to make contact with 1/29 nea r
Itomi. They met little opposition but
substantiated previous intelligence estimates locating the main Japanese battl e
position in an area between Itomi and
Toguchi. As a result of this verification,
2/29 (less Company F) was recalle d
from the north coast and ordered to set
140 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
up defensive installations and tie them
in with 1/29 on the high ground near
Itomi. Company F continued patrolling .
During the day, 1/29 patrols scouted
just to the north and northeast of Itom i
and met only light resistance. On the
other hand, 3/29, moving inland to contact the 1st Battalion, ran into heavily
defended enemy positions at Manna and
was forced to withdraw under fire to
Toguchi.
In compliance with Admiral Turner's
expressed desire that Bise Saki was to be
captured early for use as a radar site,
the 6th Reconnaissance Company was
ordered to explore the cape area on
12 April, and to seize and hold the poin t
unless opposed by overwhelming force .
As anticipated, resistance was light, an d
the area was captured and held . That
evening, Company F, 29th Marines, reinforced the division scouts. Overall
command of this provisional force was
then assumed by the reconnaissance
company commander. 6 6
In order to fix more definitely the
hostile battle position, the 29th Marines
continued probing operations. On the
12th, the 1st and 2d Battalions were disposed in positions near Itomi, and 3/29
was located in the vicinity of Toguchi .
(See Map 8.) Company G was sent
north to contact the reinforced divisio n
reconnaissance company and to mee t
2/29 at Imadomari. Company H was
ordered east to meet 1/29 at Manna ,
and Company I was ordered to patrol
to the high ground south and east
of Toguchi and to remain there overnight. As these last two companies profie 6th MarDiv Jrtl, Ph I&II, 12Apr45 .
ceeded on their missions, they came
under intense fire that prevented the
completion of their assignments unless
they were to risk sustaining unacceptable casualties. Under cover of prompt
call fires from the destroyer Preston,
LVT (A) fire, and an 81mm mortar bar -
rage, Company I was withdrawn whil e
Company H served as rear guard. Both
companies had organized a perimeter
defense at Toguchi by midafternoo n
when the battalion CP received considerable artillery and mortar fire . The
day's action cost the battalion 9 kille d
and 34 wounded. 5 7
Because of this significant enemy re -
action in the Toguchi area, Company G,
upon its arrival at Imadomari at 1415,
was recalled by the battalion. When
Company H had been hit in the morning,
3/22 was alerted for possible commitment, and in the afternoon it was
ordered to assemble in division reserve
at Awa. Battalion headquarters and
Companies I and K completed the motorized move after 1700, and L arrived at
0900 the following morning .
By the night of 12 April, General
Shepherd's division was confronted with
a fourfold task : to continue occupation
and defense of the Bise area ; to secure
the line Kawada Wan-Shana Wan an d
prevent enemy movement through that
area ; to seize, occupy, and defend Hed o
Misaki, the northernmost tip of Okinawa ; and to destroy the Japanese
forces on Motobu Peninsula. 58 On 10
April, 1/22 had established a perimete r
defense at Shana Wan from which i t
5T 3/29 SAR, Ph I&II, p . 4 .
58 IIIAC OperO 4-45, dtd 12 Apr45 .
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 141
conducted vigorous patrolling eastwar d
to the coast and north towards Hed o
Misaki. By the 12th, battalion patrols
had contacted the 4th Marines on th e
east coast ; 3/4 was ordered to move to
Kawada the next day.
During the period 8–12 April, the 4th
Marines, located near Ora, patrolled all
areas within a 3,000-yard radius of th e
regimental bivouac. On the 10th, Company K was sent north along the east
coast on extended patrol after which i t
was to rejoin its battalion at Kawada .
While in the field, the company relied o n
LVTs for daily support and evacuation .
In a week's time, the patrol had travelle d
28 miles up the coast.
Assigned the capture and defense o f
Hedo Misaki, Woodhouse's 2/22 move d
rapidly up the west coast on 13 April in
a tank- and truck-mounted infantry
column, "beating down scattered and
ineffective resistance." 59 At 2110, the
2/22 commander reported that a patro l
had entered Hedo by way of the coasta l
road and that the entry had been oppose d
only by 10 Boeitai. 60 As soon as the rest
of the battalion arrived, a base was set
up and patrols were sent out to make
contact with the 4th Marines advancing
up the east coast.
At the end of the second week on Okinawa, on Friday, 13 April (12 April i n
the States), ICEBERG forces learne d
of the death that day of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt. Memorial serv5B Cass, 6th MarDivHist, p. 57. General Buckner wanted this area captured early to gain a
radar and fighter-director site . CTF 51 AR, pt
III, p . 37.
e0 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II, 13Apr45.
ices were held on board American vessels and behind Tenth Army lines ; those
who could attend these services did so if
the fighting permitted . One senior office r
of the 1st Marine Division said later :
It was amazing and very striking how
the men reacted. We held services, but
services did not seem enough. The men
were peculiarly sober and quiet all that
day and the next. Plainly each of them
was carrying an intimate sorrow of the
deepest kind, for they paid it their highest
tribute, the tribute of being unwilling t o
talk about it, of leaving how they felt
unsaid. 6 1
THE BATTLE FOR YAE TAKE
While three of its four assigned missions in the north were being accomplished by extensive patrolling against
little or no opposition, the 6th Marine
Division found that destroying th e
firmly entrenched bulk of the enemy wa s
becoming an increasingly difficult problem. Company I had apparently touched
a sensitive nerve during its probings
near Toguchi, judging by the immediate
enemy reaction. This assumption was
confirmed on the night of 12–13 April,
when the 29th Marines encountered
some English-speaking Okinawans, wh o
had at one time lived in Hawaii.
The Marines were told that there was
a concentration of 1,000 Japanese on the
high ground overlooking the MannaToguchi road south of the Manna River.
The civilians said further that the enemy
force was commanded by a Colonel Udo ,
and that it contained an artillery unit
under a Captain Kiruyama. 82 Previous
81 Quoted in McMillan, The Old Breed, p. 368.
ez 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II, 13Apr45 .
142 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
reports of enemy order of battle were
corroborated by the operations of stron g
combat patrols ; the 6th Division now
firmly fixed the Japanese defenses in a n
area some six by eight miles surrounding the rugged and dominating Mount
Yae Take. 63 (See Map 8.)
The ground around this towering
1,200-foot-high peak prohibited extensive manuevering and completely favored the defense . Yae Take was the
peninsula's key terrain feature and its
heights commanded the nearby landscape, the outlying islands, and all of
Nago Wan. The steep and broken approaches to the mountain would den y
an attacker any armor support . Infantry
was sure to find the going difficult ove r
the nearly impassable terrain. The Japanese defenses had been intelligentl y
selected and thoroughly organized ove r
an obviously long period. All natural or
likely avenues of approach were heavil y
mined and covered by fire .
It was soon concluded that approximately 1,500 men were defending the
area and that the garrison, named the
Udo Force after its commander, wa s
built around elements of the 44th Independent Mixed Brigade . Included in this
group were infantry, machine gun units,
light and medium artillery, Okinawa n
conscripts, and naval personnel from
Unten Ko. In addition to 75mm and
150mm artillery pieces, there were two
6-inch naval guns capable of bearing o n
the coastal road for 10 miles south of
" Since "take" translated is mountain, Mount
Yae Take is redundant, but was commonly
used by participants of the battle.
Motobu, on Ie Shima, and all of Nag o
Wan. 64
General Shepherd's estimate of th e
situation indicated that reduction of th e
Yae Take redoubt was beyond the capabilities of a single reinforced infantr y
regiment. In face of this conclusion, the
4th Marines (less 3/4) was ordered to
move from the east coast to Yofuke.
The 29th Marines was ordered to continue developing the enemy positions by
vigorous patrolling on 13 April and t o
deploy for an early morning attack on
the next day. 6 5
Complying with General Shepherd' s
orders, Colonel Bleasdale again at -
tempted to clear the Itomi-Toguch i
road 66 and join his 1st and 3d Battalions. As elements of 1/29 moved ou t
of Itomi towards Manna, they were am -
bushed and hit hard again by the 20mm
cannon fire coming from the commanding heights. Probing north from Awa ,
3/22 patrols also came under fire . Before
these patrols could withdraw under th e
cover of their battalion 81mm mortars ,
an hour-long fire fight ensued. Adding
to the general harassment from the enemy, artillery fire was placed on 3/22
positions in the afternoon.
At this same time, Japanese counterbattery fire was delivered against the
84 "The 77th Infantry Division on le Shima
was pleased when 'Mt . Yae Take' was captured
with its two 6-inch naval guns." LtGen Andrew
D. Bruce ltr to Asst G-3, HQMC, dtd 280ct65 ,
hereafter Bruce ltr 1965 . At the time that the
battle for Yae Take was shaping up, the 77th
was fully involved with landing operations o n
Ie Shima.
65 6th MarDiv Jnl, Ph I&II, 13Apr45 .
99 MajGen Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., memo
for the OIC, HistDiv, HQMC, dtd 30ct47 .

144 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
emplaced artillery of 2/15 (Major Nat
M. Pace) . This heavy bombardment inflicted 32 casualties, including two battery commanders and the executiv e
officer of a third battery, and destroye d
the battalion ammunition dump and tw o
105mm howitzers. 07 Air strikes wer e
called in on the suspected sources of the
fire and 3/22 dispatched patrols in an
attempt to locate the enemy mortar batteries. Fires and exploding ammunition
made the Marine artillery position untenable, so Pace's men withdrew t o
alternate positions.
6 8
Earlier in the day, the 4th Marines
(less 3/4) began its move to Yofuke wit h
Hayden's 2d Battalion in the lead . The
west coast was gained after a difficult
hike over primitive roads, but Hayden
was ordered to continue the march to a
point on the southwest corner of th e
peninsula just below Toguchi, and th e
battalion arrived there at 1700 . Green's
1st Battalion arrived at Yofuke at 1630
and, while digging in for the night, wa s
ordered to move to a position just west
of Awa. This displacement was accomplished just prior to darkness by shuttling the battalion by truck, a company
at a time. When nightfall came, the 4th
Marines was disposed with the 1st an d
2d Battalions in perimeter defense, a
little less than three miles apart on the
southwest coast of Motobu ; the 3d Battalion was 20 miles away on the east
coast ; and regimental headquarters wa s
set up at Yofuke with the Weapons
Company. 6 9
"15th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, chap X, n.p . ;
LtCol Nat M. Pace ltr to CMC, dtd 22Mar55 .
°B Ibid.
80 Maj Orville V. Bergren ltr to CMC, dtd
6Feb48, hereafter Bergren ltr.
Based on his original estimate of the
situation, General Shepherd planned a
coordinated attack for 14 April whe n
the 4th Marines, with 3/29 attached,
would advance inland to the east. At the
same time, the 29th Marines (less 3/29 )
would drive to the west and southwest
from the center of the peninsula . In effect, this was a situation where two
assault regiments attacked a target
from directly opposing positions. The
danger of overlapping supporting fire s
was lessened, in this case, by the intervention of the high Yae Take mass.
Nevertheless, success of this rare maneuver required close and careful coordination of all supporting arms . (See
Map 8. )
In the 4th Marines zone of action ,
Colonel Shapley's troops were ordere d
initially to seize a 700-foot-high ridge
about 1,200 yards inland and dominatin g
the west coast and its road . It was immediately behind this ridge that Company I of 3/29 had been mauled on the
12th. Intermittent machine gun fire ha d
been received from this area since that
time.
The attack jumped off at 0830 on the
14th with 3/29 on the left, 2/4 on the
right, and 1/4 initially in regimental
reserve. Preceded by an intense artillery, aerial, and naval bombardment ,
the Marines advanced against surprisingly light resistance. Disregarding
scattered Japanese machine gun, mortar, and light artillery fire, the Marine s
gained the ridge before noon with the
left flank of 3/29 anchored to a very
steep slope . 7 0
7 °4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, p . 12 ; 2/4 SAR,
Ph I&II, p . 7 ; 3/29 SAR, Ph I&II, p . 4 .
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 145
In order to protect his open righ t
flank, Colonel Shapley moved 1/4 up t o
an assembly area to the right rear of 2/4.
Company C was ordered to take a
dominating ridge 1,000 yards to the
right front of the 2d Battalion . By noon
the company made contact with smal l
enemy groups and soon thereafter began
receiving mortar and machine gun fire.
Company A was then committed on the
left of Company C and the advance was
continued.
At the same time, 2/4 and 3/29 resumed the attack to seize the next objective, another ridge 1,000 yards t o
the front. As the troops headed into the
low ground approaching the height,
enemy resistance began to stiffen appreciably even though the advance was
again preceded by heavy naval gunfir e
and artillery barrages, and two air
strikes. The ground, ideally suited for
defense, consisted of broken terrai n
covered with scrub conifers and tangled
underbrush, and the Japanese exploited
this advantage to the utmost.
The enemy defense was comprised o f
small, concealed groups which formed
covering screens to the main positions .
The Japanese employed every possibl e
stratagem to delay and disorganize th e
advance, and to mislead the attackers
as to the location of the main battle
position. Enemy soldiers would lie in a
concealed position with their weapon s
zeroed in on a portion of the trail ove r
which the Marines would have to pass .
After allowing a sizable force to pass
without interference, the enemy woul d
open up on what they considered a
choice target. When a company commander passed the ambush point with
his headquarters section, the machine
guns opened up, killing him and severa l
other nearby Marines. There were man y
officer casualties. It was in this manne r
that the commander of 1/4 was killed i n
an area where there had been no firin g
for over half an hour. No one else was
hurt, though Major Green's operations
and intelligence officers were standin g
on either side of him. Lieutenant Colonel Fred D. Beans, regimental executive
officer, assumed command of the battalion.
Although the hills and ravines were
apparently swarming with Japanese, i t
was difficult to close with them. "It was
like fighting a phantom enemy," state d
one Marine officer. 71 The small enemy
groups, usually armed with a heavy
Hotchkiss machine gun and several
light Nambu machine guns, frequentl y
changed positions in the dense undergrowth. When fired upon, furious
Marines raked the area from where th e
volleys had come. After laboriousl y
working their way to the suspecte d
enemy position, the Marines came upon
only an occasional bloodstain on the
ground ; they found neither live nor
dead Japanese .
Company G of 2/4 made the first
strong contact with the enemy at 1350
when it came under rifle, machine gun,
mortar, and artillery fire . Less than five
minutes later, Company E began receiving similar treatment. After being
spotted, a Japanese artillery piece wa s
silenced by naval gunfire and artillery
" Maj Orville V. Bergren, "School Solutions
on Motobu," Marine Corps Gazette, v . 29, no.
12 (Dec45), p. 3, hereafter Bergren, "School
Solutions."
146 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
brought to bear on it. 72 Despite heavy
casualties in Company G and stubborn
enemy delaying tactics, Hayden's battalion drove the covering forces back
and took the ridge with a frontal attack
combined with an envelopment from the
right. By 1630, the attack had halte d
with both 3/29 and 2/4 on the regimental objective and 1/4 on the high
ground to the right. Contact was then
established all along the line.
East of Yae Take, the 29th Marines
jumped off from Itomi in a column o f
battalions to clear the Itomi-Toguchi
road and to eliminate the strongpoints
that patrols had discovered the previous
four days. (See Map 8.) As the attack
developed, it became apparent that an
advance in a westerly direction woul d
be both difficult and costly. The axis of
the attack was reoriented, therefore, to
the southwest in order to take advantag e
of the high ground. With Lieutenant
Colonel Moreau's 1st Battalion leading ,
the 29th Marines advanced 800 yards
up steep slopes against determined
enemy resistance. By late afternoon,
1/29 had become pinned down by overwhelming fire from the high ground to
its front. The 2d Battalion was committed on the left flank to strengthen
the defense and the troops dug in for the
night.
When it was relieved during the day
by 1/22, 3/4 made a motor march from
its east coast position to relieve 3/22 in
division reserve . The latter then re-
" The piece, however, was not destroyed a s
the Japanese had employed their familiar tacti c
of firing three or four rounds from a position
at the mouth of a cave, and then withdrawin g
the weapon back into the tunnel, where counterbattery fire could not reach it. 2/4 SAR, Ph
I&II, p . 5.
turned to its patrol base at Majiya .
The following day, L plus 14, Colone l
William J. Whaling assumed comman d
of the 29th Marines from Colonel Bleasdale, and the regimental CP displace d
to Itomi. 73 During the day, the regiment
consolidated its position and organize d
defensive positions on the high ground.
(See Map 9 .) Constant pressure in th e
rear of Yae Take was maintained b y
vigorous patrolling which assisted the
4th Marines on the other side of the
mountain. At 1600, heavy 20mm cannon
fire began raining down on the battalion
command posts 74 and, about the same
time, enemy forces unsuccessfull y
attempted to infiltrate 2/29 lines unde r
the cover of grenade, rifle, and morta r
fire. By 1700, 2/29 had tied in with th e
1st Battalion, and shortly after was abl e
to stem the forces of the attack, but not
before 35 Marines had become casualties. 75 Artillery and mortar fire, an d
naval gunfire from the main and secondary batteries of the Colorado were
placed on the suspected 20mm cannon
emplacements and silenced them for a
time. 7 6
When the 4th Marines began its
attack at 0700 on the 15th, it was in th e
same formation in which it had halte d
the previous night. The advance was
resisted by small scattered groups such
as those that opposed the Marines th e
day before. At noon, as the regiment
approached the half-way mark to that
day's objective, Japanese resistance be -
" Col William J. Whaling ltr to CMC, dtd
16Dec47, hereafter Whaling ltr.
" 29th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, p. 2.
" Ibid.
Se CO, USS Colorado (BB—45) Rpt, ser 002,
dtd 6Jun45, p . 29 (OAB, NHD) .

148 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
came markedly stiffer. From caves and
pillboxes emplaced in dominating terrain, the enemy poured down effective
fire as the assaulting units climbed th e
steep mountainside . (See Map 9.)
As 3/29 pushed forward some 900
yards to the east and south, it engage d
in numerous fire fights while it receive d
intense machine gun, mortar, and artillery fire. An enemy strongpoint on Hill
210, 500 yards to the battalion right
front, held up the advance. In addition
to well-dug-in machine guns and mortars, the position also contained the
mountain gun that had been pinpointe d
the day before . For the second day ,
attempts were made to destroy this
devastating weapon with naval gunfire
and artillery, as well as air strikes whic h
employed 500-pound bombs and napalm .
Despite these efforts, the piece continue d
functioning and causing considerable
damage.
All along the line, bitter fighting en -
sued as 2/4 again bore the brunt of th e
rugged going in attempting to capture
the high ground dominating the right
flank. Although it jumped off with three
companies abreast (less one platoon i n
battalion reserve), 2/4 was able to mak e
only small gains against intense small
arms fire. After a day's fighting, th e
battalion managed to place two companies on Hill 200, while the third one ,
despite severe casualties (65, includin g
3 company commanders), eventually
advanced three-fourths of the way up
a hill to the right of 200. In order to
establish a better position, Company G
withdrew partway down the hill where
it tied in with Company F. On the right
of the regimental line, a 200-yard gap
between the 2d and 1st Battalions was
covered by fire. In the late afternoon, in
the area immediately southwest of Yae
Take, 1/4 finally seized a key hill mass
from which it had been driven back
earlier in the day .
When the attack ceased at 1630, the
center and right battalions were o n
their objectives and 3/29 was slightly
behind them, organizing ground favorable for defense . During the day, resupply operations and the evacuation of
the mounting number of casualties over
the tortuous terrain became more an d
more difficult, and the troops had be -
come very tired. Nonetheless, many
caves had been sealed and there were
1,120 enemy dead counted . Colonel Ud o
apparently foresaw defeat ; that night
he decided to resort to guerrilla operations and also to move his command t o
the mountain strongholds of northern
Okinawa by way of Itomi. 7 7
The 4th Marines knew by this time
that it was attacking a force of at least
two companies which had organized th e
terrain to their best possible advantage .
Moreover, it became apparent that the
Japanese had oriented their defenses to
face the anticipated direction of the
attack. Owing to these circumstances,
and since the advance was still toward
friendly troops and artillery, it was decided to contain Udo's mountain force
and envelop his defenses by a flanking
" Okinawa Operations Record, p . 138. "During the period 16-19 April while pressure wa s
being applied to the Udo force on Mt. Yae Take
a considerable number of the enemy either wer e
directed to disband and directed to infiltrate
through our lines or were cut off by our
columns. They followed the natural line of
drift, were engaged by our CP at Itomi, particularly at night. Many were killed at ou r
perimeter defenses." Whaling ltr.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 149
action from the south ; this shifted the
direction of the main Marine effort to
the north. Implementing these decisions, 3/4 reverted to regimental control and was to be committed in th e
attack the next day, and 1/22 wa s
ordered into division reserve at Awa .
On 16 April, the 6th Marine Division
was deployed to wage a full-scale attack
on the enemy from three sides. (See
Map 9.) As the 29th Marines continue d
pressuring in from the east, the 4th
Marines with 3/29 would complete the
squeeze play from the west and south -
west. A juncture between the 4th and
29th Marines would be effected when
1/22 sent strong patrols north into the
gap between the two regiments. Each of
these three principal assault elements
was assigned an artillery battalion in
direct support. The artillery was so deployed that the fires of two battalions
of the 15th Marines, one company of
the 1st Armored Amphibian Battalion,
and a battery of the 7th 155mm Gun
Battalion could be placed in any of the
three zones of action. 7 8
In the 4th Marines zone, 3/29 was t o
seize the high ground 500 yards to its
front, including the redoubtable Hil l
210. To the right of this battalion, 2/4
was to remain in position and support
the attacks of Wright's 3/29 and Beans '
1/4 by fire, while units on the right
flank of 1/4 wheeled to the north . The
3d Battalion, 4th Marines, was to attack
to seize the division objective, establish
contact with 1/4 on the left, and to protect the right flank until 1/22 drew
abreast of the line . Weapons Company ,
4th Marines, organized as an infantry
' e 15th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, chap VII, n.p.
company, 70 was ordered to patrol thoroughly the right rear of Beans' an d
Wright's battalions, since 1/22 was not
scheduled to start from Majiya unti l
first light.
Because of resupply difficulties, 80 the
attack did not resume until 0900 on the
16th. By 1200, 3/29 had seized its objective with a perfectly executed basic
maneuver, a single envelopment . As the
attack began, Company H, on the 3/29
right flank, faced Hill 210 frontally.
Company G in the center was ordered
to break contact with Company I on its
left and to make an end-around play
assaulting the enemy from the south. A
Company H support platoon moved into
the gap left by G and supported that
company by fire, as did 2/4 from its
commanding position on the right .
Supporting fires effectively neutralized the Japanese defenders and kep t
their heads down until Company G
Marines had gained the top of 210 and
swarmed over the forward slope .
Grenades and demolitions blasted the
shocked enemy from their caves and
40 4th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, p . 14 .
80 "Supply and evacuation soon became a difficult problem. The road net was far from
adequate, and engineers were working feverishly to build new roads where necessary . However, the rugged terrain prevented them fro m
catching up with the infantry, and usually the
last 500 to 1,500 yards of the trip of the chow,
ammunition, and water from the forwar d
dumps to the front lines could be negotiate d
by no other means than manpower. For the
next three days this was the case . Division
sent up as many replacements from the division pool as could be spared. Battalion headquarters companies were used. Support platoons were used. Evacuation of wounded men
was equally difficult if not more so ." 4th Mar
SAR, Ph I&II, p . 13.
150 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
they retreated hastily, pursued all th e
while by effective fire from both the
assault and support units. In capturing
this objective, the Marines had silence d
the troublesome mountain gun and
killed 147 of the enemy . The positions
of Companies H and G were now inverted, with Company H in the cente r
of the line and G on the right flank
firmly holding Hill 210.
While 3/29 was securing its objective, 1/4 completed its pivot northwards
and had established contact with 3/4 .
Well to the rear, Myers' 1/22 advance d
to cover the open 4th Marines flank.
With 3/29 and 2/4 solidly established a s
landlords of the high ground facing
east, 1/4 and 3/4 looked north in positions at a right angle to the other two
battalions. When the attack resumed a
half-hour later, 3/29 and 2/4 remaine d
in position providing fire support to th e
advancing 1/4 and 3/4. At this time, the
formidable Mount Yae Take was in th e
1/4 zone.
The 1st Battalion moved out with
Company A on the left attacking
frontally up one nose, and Company C
working up a draw on the right. Progress up the steep slope was arduous and
not helped by enemy small arms fire,
light and scattered though it was. As
Company A reached the crest, the Japanese met it with withering fire at very
close range . In the face of the rifle,
machine gun, grenade, and knee mortar 81 drumfire, the Marines withdrew
below the summit, and in turn, employed
their own 60mm mortars and grenade s
against the enemy entrenched on the
81 "Knee mortar" was a misnomer American s
commonly applied to the Japanese grenade
launcher.
reverse (north) slope. The battle waged
fiercely at close quarters as neither sid e
was able to hold the height for long. At
last the tide turned in the Marines'
favor, helped mainly by supporting fire s
of 2/4 coming from the high ground
overlooking the enemy.
The victory was not bought cheaply ;
even though the two companies possessed Yae Take, the situation was critical . Over 50 Marine casualties had bee n
sustained in the assault and the ammunition supply was nearly spent. It
also appeared that the Japanese were
regrouping for a counterattack. Fortunately, effective 15th Marines artillery
fire and the excellent mortar an d
machine gun support of 2/4 held th e
enemy in check until ammunition could
be brought up.
Recalling this phase of the battle for
Mount Yae Take, the operations office r
of the 4th Marines wrote :
If the supply problem was difficult be -
fore, it was a killer now. That 1.200-foo t
hill looked like Pike's Peak to the tired ,
sweaty men who started packing up ammunition and water on their backs. Practically everyone in the 1st Bn headquarters
company grabbed as much ammunition as
he could carry. A man would walk by
carrying a five-gallon water can on his
shoulder and the battalion commander
would throw a couple of bandoleers of
ammunition over the other! . . . The Battalion commander, on his way up to th e
front lines to get a closer look at the situation, packed a water can on his way up .
Stretchers also had to be carried up, and
all hands coming down the hill were
employed as stretcher bearers. 8 2
Additional assistance in resupply an d
evacuation was afforded the 1st Bat82 Bergren, "School Solutions," p. 6.
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 151
talion when Company K, coming up
from the rear in late afternoon to revert
to the control of 3/4, took out the 1/ 4
wounded and returned with water an d
ammunition. The resupply of the 1st
Battalion occurred just in time, for at
1830, an hour after Yae Take had been
seized, the enemy reacted with a fanati c
Banzai charge across the battalio n
front. An estimated 75 Japanese mad e
up the wildly attacking group, but again
the supporting fires of artillery and 2/ 4
stemmed the rush and virtually annihilated the force . As the Marines dug i n
for the night, Mount Yae Take was hel d
securely.
Lieutenant Colonel Beans' battalion
consolidated its holdings in the afternoon while receiving small arms and
mortar fire. On the left, Company B was
committed to tie in 3/4 with the 1st
Battalion. Because its progress was
slowed more by the terrain than th e
enemy, 1/22 on the right was unable to
gain contact with either the 4th or th e
29th and established a defense perimeter for the night.
While the 4th Marines was stormin g
Yae Take, Colonel Whaling's regiment
maintained unrelenting pressure against
the enemy's rear positions. As the
attack rolled forward, the Japanese resisted stubbornly from log-revetted
bunkers and occasional concrete emplacements, and from machine gun,
mortar, and artillery positions concealed in ravines and in caves on th e
heights.
In this phase of the 6th Division' s
northern campaign, the Japanese exhibited their well-known ability to exploit the terrain and gain maximum
benefit from weapons emplaced in caves
and pits and concealed by natural
camouflage . Of all the weapons that the
enemy employed effectively, his use of
the 20mm dual-purpose cannon was
most noteworthy. Marine battalion CPs
received a daily ration of fire from thes e
weapons, and all roads and natural avenues of approach were covered . Any
Marine attempt to move over these
easier routes often proved disastrous.
Since there was no alternative, "the
method of reducing the enemy position s
followed a pattern of `ridge-hopping'," 8 3
in which all supporting arms covered
the attacking force as it enveloped hostile defenses and reduced them in detail .
In some cases, the 29th discovered
abandoned positions and weapons, suggesting that the Japanese determination
to resist was considerably diminishe d
when attacked on the flank . The action
in the 29th Marines zone was characterized by simultaneous attacks which, i n
effect, consisted of a series of local
patrol actions to seize critical positions,
followed by mopping-up activity within
the area.
A heavier-than-usual artillery preparation was laid down before the jump
off on the morning of 17 April . (See
Map 10.) At 0800, the 29th Marines
began an advance to join up with th e
4th Marines along the Itomi-Toguchi
road. From here, the two regiments
would then sweep northward abreast of
each other. Moving out over difficult
terrain against light resistance, 1/29
made slow progress, but by 1300 had
secured its objective, the highest hill i n
its area.
The enemy positions which confronte d
1/29 were on the crest and face of this
83 29th Mar SAR, Ph I&II, pt VII, p . 5.
152 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
hill and presented a problem in precision naval gunnery to the Tennessee,
whose line of supporting fire was almost
parallel to the target. As troops rapidly
advanced, the ship's main and secondary batteries delivered such an intens e
bombardment that the hill was take n
without Marine casualties. On the way
to the top, the infantry killed 8 Japanese and 32 more on the crest itself, bu t
the huge craters produced by the Tennessee's guns contained in excess of 10 0
more enemy dead . 8 4
Within an hour after 2/29 had resumed its attack, some 50 enemy troops
had been flushed out and were observed
fleeing to the northwest. Shortly after,
the battalion was able to move forward
against negligible opposition, stopping
only to destroy large enemy stores of
equipment, ammunition, and supplies.
Before noon, physical contact had been
established with 1/22, which had reduced the positions met in its zone an d
had captured a considerable amount o f
enemy clothing and ammunition . After
having made contact with the 4th
Marines on its left, 1/22 was pinched
out of the line and withdrew to Awa,
where it set up defenses for the night.
The first missions flown by TAF
squadrons in support of Marine groun d
forces during the Motobu campaign
struck enemy targets early in the morning of the 17th. At 1000, eight VMF–
322 aircraft attacked and destroye d
" In appreciation of this naval gunfire support, General Shepherd sent to the Commander ,
Northern Attack Force, a message, whic h
stated in part : ". . . the effectiveness of you r
gunfire support was measured by the large
number of Japanese encountered. Dead ones. "
Quoted in VAdm Lawrence F. Reifsnider ltr to
CMC, dtd 21Mar55 .
Manna. Upon completion of that mission, the flight was radioed by the
ground commander that "the town wa s
wiped out. One hundred per cent o f
bombs and rockets hit target area ." 8 5
VMF–312, -322, and -323 flew a tota l
of 47 sorties during the day. In the
afternoon, one mission of eight planes
was cancelled when the assigned target
was overrun by Marine infantry . "
As it still faced a critical suppl y
shortage on the 17th, the 4th Marines
did not launch its attack until 1200,
after replenishment. Then the advanc e
toward the Itomi-Toguchi road was resumed with the 1st and 3d Battalion s
on the right. In reverse of the previous
day's situation, 2/4 and 3/29 on the left
faced east at a right angle to the front
of the other two battalions in assault .
They were, therefore, ordered to remain
in place and to support the assault from
present positions until the attacking
units masked their fires.
The attacking element made rapid
progress as their downhill path was
blocked only by isolated enemy stragglers. Without too great an effort, th e
Marines overran elaborately fortifie d
positions, intricate communications systems, and bivouac areas. The hastily
departing enemy left behind a scene of
an undisciplined retreat—for dead
bodies and military paraphernalia wer e
strewn all over the area. Large stores
of equipment, food, weapons, and
clothing were either captured or destroyed. As 1/4 swept across the 3/29
front, 2 8-inch naval guns, 5 artiller y
" ADC Daily Intel Sum, 161800 to 171800 ,
dtd 17Apr45, hereafter ADC IntelSum with
date .
"e Ibid.

154 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
pieces, 8 caves full of ammunition, an d
over 300 dead Japanese were found before the Company G position on Hil l
210. 8 Although the 1st Battalion met
but few of the enemy during the day,
Hochmuth's 3d Battalion killed 56
without losing a Marine . S 8
After their attack axes had shifte d
northward, the 4th and 29th Marines
made contact with each other in late
afternoon on the high ground overlooking the Itomi-Toguchi road. At that
time, 2/29 was withdrawn from the line
to clear out any bypassed enemy pocket s
In the regimental zone. By the end of
17 April, a review of that day's operations indicated that the enemy was
unable to maintain his position and was ,
in fact, attempting to retreat in order
to escape annihilation. There was little
doubt that the 6th Marine Division ha d
broken the back of enemy resistance o n
the peninsula, an assumption that wa s
confirmed when an enemy map captured
by the 4th Marines showed that the Yae
Take position was the only organized
Japanese defense on Motobu.
After four days of vigorous fighting,
activities on the 18th were confined t o
reorganizing, resupplying, and consolidating the gains of the previous day,
and patrolling the Itomi-Toguchi road .
(See Map 10.) In an attempt to prevent
the further escape of any of the enemy
and to destroy his trenches and camouflaged emplacements in front of the
lines, at 0750, four VMF–312 plane s
attacked targets with general purpose
(GP) and napalm bombs, rockets, and
then strafed the smoking positions . The
81 3/29 SAR, Ph I&II, p . 4.
88 1/4 SAR, Ph I&II, p . 6 ; 3/4 SAR, Ph I&17,
p . 7.
ground troops later reported that all o f
the hits were in the target area and the
enemy trenches were completely destroyed. During the rest of the day,
VMF–312 and -322 flew 12 additional
sorties in support of General Shepherd's troops. 8 9
The now-bypassed 3/29 was detached
from the 4th Marines and moved
around the base of the peninsula by
truck to rejoin its parent organization
at Itomi. In the same way, 1/22 rejoine d
its regiment at Majiya. In the 4th
Marines area, the 1st Battalion went
into reserve, bivouacking near Manna.
Upon its reversion to regimental control, 3/29 took up blocking positions on
the right flank, north of Itomi, to pre -
vent any enemy escaping to the east .
The 29th Marines left flank was pushed
northward to straighten out the divisio n
lines. As 3/4 conducted local patrols,
the 2d Battalion patrolled the area
through which the 1st and 3d Battalion s
had attacked the previous day. Resupplying the assault regiments continued
to be difficult for the enemy had thoroughly mined the area now held by th e
division and had denied the Marines use
of the Itomi-Toguchi road by digging
tank traps there. In addition, many
trees had been felled across the road,
which was pockmarked with numerous
shell craters.
On L plus 18, the final drive to the
northern coast of the peninsula began
with the 4th and 29th Marines abreast.
(See Map 10.) Preceding the 0800 jump
off, four Corsairs from VMF–312 struck
at a hillside containing gun emplacements and strongpoints that oppose d
the ground attack. Again napalm, GP
88 ADC IntelSum, 18Apr45 .
THE FIRST DAYS ASHORE 155
bombs, rockets, and strafing attack s
were employed to ease the infantry advance. When the Marines pushed forward against negligible resistance, they
came across elaborate cave and trench
systems filled with numerous enemy
dead, undoubtedly the victims of the
artillery, naval gunfire, and air bombardments. All organized resistance
ended on Motobu Peninsula when the
4th and 29th Marines gained the north
coast on 20 April. General Shepherd
assigned garrison and patrol sectors t o
his units on Motobu ; 00 at the same time,
mopping-up operations continued in the
rest of the IIIAC zone.
In the course of the fighting for the
peninsula, the 6th Marine Division had
sustained casualties amounting to 207
90 6th MarDiv OperO 41-45, dtd 20Apr45.
killed, 757 wounded, and 6 missing in
action. The Marines counted over 2,00 0
Japanese dead, men who had forfeite d
their lives while defending their positions with a tenacity that was characteristic.
Of the 6th Division drive up the
isthmus and into the peninsula, Brigadier General Oliver P . Smith noted :
The campaign in the north should dispel
the belief held by some that Marines ar e
beach-bound and are not capable of rapi d
movement. Troops moved rapidly over
rugged terrain, repaired roads and blown
bridges, successively opened new unloading points, and reached the northern ti p
of the island, some 55 miles from the
original landing beaches, in 14 days. This
was followed by a mountain campaign o f
7 days' duration to clear the Motob u
Peninsula.9 1
B ` Smith, Personal Narrative, p. 82.
156 VICTORY AND OCCUPATION
USS ENTERPRISE is hit on 14 May 1945 by a Kamikaze which dove out of low
cloud cover . (USN 80-G-331011)
TRACERS fill the sky as AAA gunners repulse a Japanese raid over Yontan Airfield .
(USMC 118775)